Vol.:(0123456789)The Journal of Technology Transfer (2019) 44:359–380 https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-018-9692-2 1 3 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation  potential of EU‑funded research networks Daniel Nepelski1 · Vincent Van Roy1 · Annarosa Pesole1 Published online: 14 September 2018  © The Author(s) 2018 Abstract Public funding of research improves the systemic conditions of entrepreneurial ecosystems.  It provides early-stage financing to technologies that form the basis for new products and  services. In addition to financial support, instruments as the EC Framework Programmes  (FP) facilitate the creation of research networks. By bringing together organisations of  various types and geographic origins and increasing the diversity of their interactions,  the instrument seeks to accelerate a discovery process in which organisations attempt to  bring desired innovations to the market and society. In this paper, we examine the impact  of organisational and geographic diversity of partnerships in EU-funded research networks  on the commercial potential of their innovations. We explore a sample of 603 collaborative  research projects supported by European FPs. We use data from the Innovation Radar, a  unique survey database developed by DG CONNECT to assess the innovation outcomes  of FP projects in ICT. We show that innovations developed by research networks with a  higher organisational diversity have more commercial potential. This finding supports the  idea that policies improving systemic conditions of entrepreneurship ecosystems through  the creation of institutionally diverse research networks can have beneficial effects on the  commercialisation potential of innovations developed in FP projects. In contrast, research  networks with a wider range of internationally dispersed research partners are likely to  have less innovation potential. This may suggest the existence of coordination and commu - nication difficulties in FP projects where
may suggest the existence of coordination and commu - nication difficulties in FP projects where geographic diversity is greater. Keywords  Research networks · Innovation policy · Framework programme · Diversity JEL Classification  L52 · L53 · O31 · O32 · O25 Disclaimer: The views expressed are purely those of the authors and may not in any circumstances be  regarded as stating an official position of the European Commission.  * Vincent Van Roy   vincent.van -roy@ec.europa.eu 1 Joint Research Centre (JRC), European Commission, Calle del Inca Garcilaso 3, 41092 Seville,  Spain
360 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 1 Introduction Framework and systemic conditions constitute key elements of entrepreneurial ecosystems  (Stam and Spigel 2016). Framework conditions include the institutions, physical conditions  or demand for new value, and systemic conditions contain, among others, networks, leader - ship, finance, talent or new knowledge. Whereas the role of the public sector in creating  entrepreneurship-friendly framework conditions is relatively well understood (Fuerlinger  et al. 2015; Van Roy and Nepelski 2016, 2017), its impact on systemic conditions is less  clear. The most obvious is the function of public funding. In Europe, for example, various instruments of funding exist to improve the process of knowledge creation and innovation at  all stages of technology development and commercialisation (Gampfer et al. 2016). Many  young companies benefit from early-stage financing and state-sponsored technologies,  which often form the basis for their new products and services (Mazzucato 2013). Through  a high-level investment in risky and new technology projects, the public sector helps to cre-ate the markets of the future. In this context, the European Commission’s (EC) Framework  Programmes (FPs) have a long history of public support of the innovation and entrepreneur - ship ecosystems. But the objectives of the FPs go far beyond providing funding to tech-nology development. They also aim at improving the systemic conditions of the innovation  and entrepreneurship ecosystems by facilitating the creation of research networks between different organisations. In creating and exploiting diversified research networks, FPs are  expected to trigger technological and economic transformation (Audretsch and Link 2016;  EC 2016; Leyden 2016; Link 2016). One of the underlying assumptions behind the design  of the FPs is that network diversity is a positive factor. It is expected to increase the level of  innovation and to facilitate discovery of cross-border
It is expected to increase the level of  innovation and to facilitate discovery of cross-border applications and solutions. In this context, an important question for policy makers is: to what extent is a greater  degree of organisational and geographic diversity in EU-funded collaborative research networks beneficial to their economic outcomes. In this paper, we explore the innovation  potential of EU-funded collaborative research networks and investigate how this potential  is related to the degree of organisational and geographic diversity of organisations involved  in the development of innovations. We analysed a sample of 603 collaborative research net-works from various EU-funded FPs. An extensive body of literature has explored the benefits and drawbacks of organisa- tional and geographic diversity in collaborative research networks and strategic alliances (e.g. Belderbos et al. 2004; Laursen and Salter 2006; Duysters and Lokshin 2011). Overall,  a greater diversity in the type of research partners opens up greater opportunities for inter- organisational learning (Luukkonen 1998, 2000), provides access to diverse competencies  (Kogut 1988; Hagedoorn 1993; Caloghirou et al. 2001), leads to a greater variety of ideas  and creativity and contributes to more effective problem solving. At the same time, institu-tionally more diverse research consortia face difficulties due to differences in institutional  culture across research partners (Goerzen and Beamish 2005; Pandza et al. 2011). In addi- tion, managerial problems may arise when the various organisations engaged in collabora-tive projects attempt to reconcile their different objectives and time-frames (Harryson et al.  2008). Finally, a greater degree of geographic diversity in collaborative research networks  is generally associated with greater coordination and transaction costs. This paper contributes in various ways to the literature on this topic. First, it focuses on  the collective performance of
various ways to the literature on this topic. First, it focuses on  the collective performance of research projects. So far, impact assessment studies of EU-funded collaborative research projects have mainly explored how participating in these pro- jects has affected aspects of firms’ economic performance, such as profitability or employ - ment change (Bayona-Sáez and García-Marco 2010; Barajas et  al. 2012; Aguiar and
361 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 Gagnepain 2017). Second, it exploits a unique survey database developed by DG CON- NECT that provides valuable information about both the innovators participating in EU- funded collaborative research projects with an ICT theme and the innovations developed  by them (De Prato et al. 2015; Nepelski and Piroli 2018). This allows us to approach the notion of innovation from a holistic perspective in which innovation potential is not merely  measured by innovation output, i.e. filed patent applications. In this paper, the innovation  potential of EU-funded research projects is measured as a composite indicator which cap- tures various determining dimensions of the innovation and technology development pro- cess, including the levels of innovation readiness, management and market potential. The remainder of this article is structured as follows. Section  2 briefly reviews the rel- evant existing literature on the benefits and drawbacks of organisational and geographic diversity in collaborative research settings. It presents the most recent literature on impact assessments of Framework Programmes. 1 This is followed by a description of the method- ology and data sources used to measure innovation potential and diversity in EU-funded  research networks. Descriptive statistics are given in Sect.  4 and the empirical results in  Sect.  5. Finally Sect.  6 offers some concluding remarks and recommendations for future  research. 2  Previous literature Since 1984, the European Commission has launched several Framework Programmes (FP)  to support cooperative R&D within the European Union. The main objectives of these pro- grammes are to sustain and enhance the international competitiveness of European indus- try and to increase the wellbeing of citizens (Caloghirou et al. 2004). FPs allocate public funding specifically to research consortia which involve partners from various countries  and institutional
specifically to research consortia which involve partners from various countries  and institutional settings to carry out collaborative research projects. Usually these consor - tia are made up of firms (SMEs and large firms), universities, public research centres and government institutions (Barajas et al. 2012). Public interventions of this kind are traditionally seen as mechanisms to overcome mar - ket failures. Market failures can arise when firms cannot preclude dissemination of knowl-edge to competitors and hence are prevented from fully appropriating the returns of their  R&D efforts. This may lead to lower investment in innovation activity than is socially desirable (Nelson 1959; Arrow 1962). The FPs incorporate two types of public policies  that are commonly used to reduce this market failure. First, FP projects must be co-funded  through grants from the European Commission and private funds from consortia partners.  The use of direct financial support for R&D by means of grants incentivises firms to pur - sue socially valuable R&D projects that would not be conducted otherwise. Second, FPs  are designed to encourage close and strategic R&D collaboration among different part- ners. This collaboration makes it possible to partially internalise knowledge leaks and thus  increases the appropriability of returns within the research consortia. In addition to the intervention to solve market failures, FPs also play a more active and  mission-oriented role in creating and encouraging new market opportunities and in devel-oping emerging sectors (Audretsch and Link 2016; Leyden 2016; Mazzucato 2016). In this  1 We acknowledge that the impact of organisational and geographic diversity on innovation performance  has received ample attention in the scientific literature (e.g. Belderbos et al. 2004; Laursen and Salter 2006;  Duysters and Lokshin 2011). However, we restrict the literature review to the handful of publications that  provide evidence for publicly-funded
the literature review to the handful of publications that  provide evidence for publicly-funded research projects to target more closely the main subject of this paper.
362 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 respect, FPs serve as policy tools that shape the directionality of technology and economic  transformations. By fostering the creation and consolidation of institutionally and inter - nationally diverse research networks within the European area, FPs facilitate discovery of cross-border applications and solutions. One of the objectives of FPs is to tackle large-scale societal challenges and complex research projects that require relevant knowledge  more likely to be found in networks of organisations. Thus, publically-funded research  programmes such as the FPs have a threefold impact on systemic conditions of entrepre- neurship ecosystems. First, they provide finance for high-risk projects with uncertain com- mercial potential. Second, they direct and accelerate the process of novel, market-creating technologies. Third, they increase the level of connectedness between organisations of var - ious types, background and roles in the economy and society. In line with these considerations, the economic and societal impacts of research net- works and in particular FPs are manifold. First, FPs have been particularly success- ful in incorporating smaller and peripheral communities in the wider European network,  strengthening the research integration and cohesion in Europe (Protogerou et  al. 2013).  Second, research networks are effective for both the creation and diffusion of knowledge  and technologies, which can further spur regional or national wealth and competitiveness (Lehmann and Menter 2016). Analysing a panel of countries that participated in FP over  the period 1994-2005, Di Cagno et al. (2014) find that participation in EU-funded research  projects is an important channel of knowledge transfer. New knowledge produced within research networks can for instance spill over to the local market by means of labour mobil- ity, patent licensing and research contacts. Finally, besides the beneficial societal impact  of the creation of new
and research contacts. Finally, besides the beneficial societal impact  of the creation of new technologies and spillover effects, research networks can lead to the creation of new firms that emerge during the collaborative efforts. To increase the economic and societal impact of research networks, a better under - standing of the formation of the networks in terms of the organisational and geographic  diversity of participating entities and their economic outcome is of great importance. The  impact of both organisational and geographic diversity in collaborative research networks has been extensively explored. As organisations and nations provide institutional and  national boundaries for groups of people with different cultural backgrounds, the litera- ture on organisational and geographic diversity relate extensively to the literature on cul-tural diversity. To a large extent the variety of cultural backgrounds of individuals shapes  the diversity in terms of education, know-how, experiences and objectives in organisations  and defines the advantages and drawbacks of collaborative endeavours in a setting with  multiple organisations and countries. A large strand of literature has analysed the effect  of cultural diversity on individual, group and organisational outcomes (Cox 1993). The most recurrent arguments highlighting the positive advantages of cultural diversity are the  access to a broad base of talent thriving creativity, a better problem-solving capacity and a  better ability in dealing with complex issues (Cox and Blake 1991; Ely and Thomas 2001). Common drawbacks of a large cultural diversity are increased costs in time and financial  resources due to conflicts and communication issues (Brett et al. 2006; Stahl et al. 2010). Performing an in-depth study by means of interviews of a small EU project funded by  the Framework Programme, Ahonen and Tienari (2009) highlight the importance of diver - sity management in an institutional diversified setting
(2009) highlight the importance of diver - sity management in an institutional diversified setting with transnational organisations. The  authors mainly analyse power relations and the role of knowledge. In line with their dis- cussion and the literature on cultural diversity, we provide below a detailed overview of  the advantages and disadvantages of organisational and geographic diversity in research networks.
363 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 2.1  Organisational diversity Given the increasing complexity of innovations and the limited resources and competen- cies of individual organisations, the number of research collaborations has grown rapidly  during the last few decades (Hagedoorn and Kranenburg 2003; Faems et al. 2005; Pavitt  2005; Aristei et al. 2016). The rapid development of research carried out in collaboration by different types of organisations is driven by several advantages. Working together with other organisations gives research partners access to knowledge  and complementary assets that they do not possess in-house (Teece 1986; Hagedoorn  1993; Powell et  al. 1996). Conducting research and development with external partners  allows partners to create and mobilize more resources than would be possible through their individual efforts (Das and Teng 2000). Collaborative research reduces the risks associ- ated with the R&D-intensive projects, but requires enough internal R&D knowledge on the  part of the research partners to understand, assimilate and exploit the accessed or acquired external technology (Cohen and Levinthal 1990). Overall, research collaborations with dif- ferent types of partners serve as conduits for information and learning and are of strategic  importance in the diffusion of tacit and codified knowledge (Eisenhardt and Schoonhoven  1996; Doz and Hamel 1997; Ahuja 2000). Hence, research collaborations are seen as effec- tive means of getting information about new practices and they serve as a radar function  to screen promising new technologies (Freeman 1991; Powell and Brantley 1992; Ahuja  2000; Ahuja and Lampert 2001). Luukkonen (1998, 2000) investigated the benefits of participating in Framework Pro- grammes. He reported that improvement of skills, expansion of research lines and access  to larger networks of contacts and capabilities were among the most frequently mentioned  advantages of European
of contacts and capabilities were among the most frequently mentioned  advantages of European Framework Programmes. At the same time, greater heterogeneity of organisation types in research collaborations  can be a hindrance to the economic performance of research networks. The potential ben-efits of organisational diversity may be consumed by greater communication and infor - mation exchange problems, differences in institutional culture (Zucker 1986; Hennart and Zeng 2002), incompatible reward systems (e.g. publications versus commercial products  and services), managerial issues and barriers to trust (Goerzen and Beamish 2005; Pandza  et al. 2011). Analysing research collaborations in FP projects, Archibugi and Coco (2004)  show that firms may be reluctant to engage in collaborative partnerships for competitive  reasons. Similarly, Röller et al. (2007) show that large firms are less willing to share their  economic knowledge with smaller rivals and prefer to collaborate with other large firms in  order to maximise the internalisation of spillovers. According to Harryson et  al. (2008), another fundamental issue in interorganisational  collaboration arises from having to reconcile different objectives, time-frames and from finding optimal network structures for innovation. For SMEs, alliances with external part- ners are often driven by a lack of internal financial resources or technological and mana- gerial competences (Lerner and Merges 1998). Accordingly, SMEs have a strong strategic alignment with FP projects and explicit goals related to innovation outputs such as develop- ing a prototype, a patentable technology, or a complementary technology that will directly  enhance their competitiveness (Polt et al. 2008). They focus on projects with an applied ori- entation and engage only in cooperative agreements that are likely to yield tangible benefits  and guarantee their immediate survival and growth (Miles et al. 1999; Baum et al. 2000). Large firms appeared
their immediate survival and growth (Miles et al. 1999; Baum et al. 2000). Large firms appeared much less inclined to commercialise right out of the project than  SMEs which are highly committed to commercialisation. Because of the more marginal
364 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 role of FP projects, larger companies reported weaker strategic alignment and less explicit  goals. For them, participation in research collaborations means technology watch, acquisi- tion of new knowledge and building partnerships (Hernán et al. 2003). Universities and public research centres, on the other hand, participate in research  collaborations in order to acquire complementary resources that allow them to advance research (Caloghirou et al. 2001; Polt et al. 2008). Based on their scientific capabilities,  universities engage in research collaborations for their research contents (Carayol 2003).  The main criterion for collaboration is that this content feeds a university’s own research  agenda. Commercialisation is not the main objective, but rather the building up of new knowledge and technology and the investigation of new research areas. Overall, industry players tend to engage in research collaborations from a knowledge  exploitation strategy which is characterised by a short- and medium-term horizon. Pub-lic research institutions, on the other hand, follow a knowledge exploration strategy which  tends to have a long-term perspective (Hansen 1999). A wider diversity of organisation  types in FP projects provides a variety of roles, competences and expectations through the  different phases of the research projects. Hence, collaborations between industry and pub- lic institutions may create beneficial complementary effects, but they can at the same time be potential sources of conflict (Pandza et al. 2011). 2.2  Geographic diversity and geographical proximity A great international heterogeneity of partners in a research collaboration implies advan-tages but also challenges in collaborating with partners located in different countries. The  literature highlights the benefits of geographic diversity in gaining access to highly sophis- ticated, specialised and tacit knowledge from various local sources (Meyer-Krahmer and Reger
ticated, specialised and tacit knowledge from various local sources (Meyer-Krahmer and Reger 1999; Lavie and Miller 2008). Diversity of national backgrounds extends the scope  of accessible knowledge bases and provides access to network resources that may spur innovation (Gulati 1999). However, greater geographic diversity entails higher coordination and transaction costs  (Hagedoorn et al. 2000; Caloghirou et al. 2003; Caloghirou et al. 2004; Goerzen and Beam-ish 2005). Research collaborations characterised by large international heterogeneity are  much more complex and difficult to manage. Difficulties in assimilating and coordinating operations across national borders are driven by a lack of face-to-face communications, lan-guage barriers and higher costs of information transfer. In addition, when research collabora- tion involves a wide diversity of internationally dispersed research partners, there is greater  difficulty in specifying intellectual property rights, legally enforcing intellectual property,  and monitoring partner activities (Pisano 1990; Oxley 1997), which further increases trans- action costs. The difficulties that geographic diversity brings along may contribute to the creation of smaller informal clusters within the collaborative research project, which can  potentially affect the overall coherence of the project (Goerzen and Beamish 2005). Besides geographic diversity, the geographical proximity between research partners is  recognised as a salient factor, which affects collective innovative endeavours (Audretsch and Feldman 1996; Asheim and Gertler 2005; Boschma 2005). Geographical proxim- ity between research partners is of crucial importance in getting access to tacit and non-codified knowledge from other partners, given that knowledge spillovers are geographi- cally bounded (Jaffe et  al. 1993; Anselin et  al. 1997). Larger distance may increase  communication and coordination difficulties between research partners, and may hamper
365 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 the innovation potential of cooperative projects (Keller 1986; Hoegl and Proserpio 2004;  Mora-Valentin et al. 2004). 2.3  Impact assessment of Framework Programmes Despite the long-term tradition of EU-wide public support for R&D in the form of Frame- work Programmes, studies evaluating the impact of these interventions on research pro- jects’ innovation performance remain relatively scarce. Impact assessment studies of FPs  have mainly explored the effect of firms’ participation on their economic performance, such as profitability or employment change (Bayona-Sáez and García-Marco 2010; Bara- jas et al. 2012; Aguiar and Gagnepain 2017). In their analysis of a sample of firms active  in FP projects, Aguiar and Gagnepain (2017) showed that participation in the Framework  Programme led to a considerable increase in labour productivity though the effect on profit  margins remained limited. Similarly, Barajas et al. (2012) found that participating in FPs had a positive impact on Spanish manufacturing firms’ technological capabilities, which  indirectly translated into an increase of labour productivity. Bayona-Sáez and García- Marco 2010 found that the completion of an FP project had a positive impact on firm per - formance measured as return over assets. Notable exceptions are the studies of Nepelski and Piroli (2018) and Schwartz et  al.  (2012). Nepelski and Piroli (2018) analysed the relationship between the diversity of  research partners in FP projects and the potential of their innovations. The authors show  that the innovative potential of research output of homogenous partnerships, e.g. between two SMEs or two large companies, is likely to be higher than that of heterogeneous part- nerships, e.g. an SME and a large company. In contrast to the current paper, the analysis  did not account for all participants of the research networks but explored only the diversity of the three key organisations
of the research networks but explored only the diversity of the three key organisations in delivering innovations in FP projects. Similarly, Schwartz et al. (2012) explored the factors that drive innovation output from  subsidised R&D cooperation projects in Germany. Using patent applications and publica-tions as measures for the innovation output of the projects, the involvement of large firms  in the research consortium is strongly and positively associated with the number of patent  applications but not with the number of publications, while university involvement yields  the opposite results. In their exploration of diversity in FP projects, Coad et al. (2017) found negative rela- tionships between the level of organisational diversity, geographic diversity and diversity in terms of members’ shares of project cost. These findings suggest that the optimum amount  of diversity in one dimension depends on the amount of diversity in other dimensions. Hence, the authors argue that a high level of diversity in one dimension may not necessarily  be a liability as long as it can be compensated by sufficient similarity in another dimension.  While shedding new light on the interactions across various diversity dimensions in FP pro- jects, Coad et al. (2017) did not explore their effect on research projects’ performance. 3  Data sources and methodology 3.1  Innovation potential of research projects To investigate the relationship between the organisational and geographic diversity in EU- funded collaborative research projects and their innovation potential, we used information
366 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 from the Innovation Radar. The Innovation Radar (IR) is an EC support initiative that aims  to assess the potential of innovations developed within FP research projects and to identify  the bottlenecks to their commercialisation (De Prato et al. 2015). Data used to build the  innovation potential assessment framework of the Innovation Radar stem from a survey developed by DG CONNECT. The survey was conducted by external experts commis- sioned by DG CONNECT during periodic reviews of the research projects between Octo- ber 2014 and January 2016. The Innovation Radar monitors the ICT research actions and  the e-infrastructures activity under the seventh Framework Programme 2007-2013 (under  cooperation and capacities themes), the policy support actions carried out under the com-petitiveness and innovation framework policy support programme (CIP ICT PSP) and the  ICT-related projects in Horizon 2020 (EC 2014). The innovation potential assessment framework of the IR is extensively based on the  extant literature analysing the antecedents and success factors of new product performances and R&D projects (Rothwell 1992; Balachandra and Friar 1997; Heslop et al. 2001; Aste- bro 2004; Evanschitzky et al. 2012). The literature discussing success in innovations and  R&D projects is vast and lacks uniformity in the use of project outcome measures (Bal-achandra and Friar 1997; Cooper and Kleinschmidt 1997). According to Astebro (2004), project commercialisation is one of the most easily operationalized and replicable defini- tion across studies and is in this sense the most objective measure for a project’s outcome.  In the same vein, the Innovation Radar aims at providing a contingency framework and metrics measuring the project’s development towards commercialisation. However, in con- trast with this literature the innovation potential indicator does by no means intend to pro- vide a predictive signal of the innovation success, but rather aims to
by no means intend to pro- vide a predictive signal of the innovation success, but rather aims to measure the progress that has been undertaken in developing and commercialising an innovation on the market. A large body of empirical studies has emerged over the past decades aiming at unravel- ling factors determining the technology development and commercialisation process (for  extended surveys see Montoya-Weiss and Calantone 1994; Griffin 1997; Galbraith et al.  2006). Within this empirical literature little convergence exists regarding the number, defi-nition and theoretical grounding for the key factors of effective technology commercialisa- tion (Astebro 2004). Despite the lack of agreement on the specific variables that are used  in the empirical analyses, there does, however, seem to be some consensus on the overall  classes or groups of these key factors. Based on a meta-analysis of 60 peer-reviewed pub- lications, Balachandra and Friar (1997) proposes four major categories on market, technol- ogy, environment, and organisational related characteristics. These categories have been  widely recognised and adopted by many scholars in the field of technology commercialisa- tion of R&D projects (Linton et al. 2002; Astebro 2004). Alternatively, Heslop et al. (2001) use factor analyses to group more than fifty variables related to the technology commer - cialisation process into four comprehensive dimensions of market readiness, technology readiness, commercial readiness, and management readiness. Taking stock of these considerations, the Innovation Radar framework is built along  the areas discussed in this stream of literature and incorporates them in the following dimensions: market potential, innovation readiness and innovation management (De Coster and Butler 2005; Liao and Witsil 2008). Each of these dimensions is discussed in  more detail below. Innovation readiness A successful launch of innovative products or services begins  with the identification of
readiness A successful launch of innovative products or services begins  with the identification of technologies that are ready for commercialisation (Heslop  et al. 2001; Galbraith et al. 2006). In this respect, innovation readiness is closely related  to the notion of “technology readiness levels” (TRLs) which aim to provide a common  understanding of the status and development stage of new technologies (Mankins 2009).
367 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 Originally developed by the NASA in the mid-1970s, the use of TRLs rapidly increased  as they enable consistent and uniform assessments of technological maturity across dif- ferent types of technologies and disciplines. Being discipline-independent, they facili- tate more effective communications of the maturity of evolving innovations among diverse organisation types. Factors related to innovation readiness include, among oth- ers, the quality of the technology, age, scope, how pioneering it is, and expected time to  market. Innovation readiness aims to define the development phase of the innovation,  e.g. conceptualization, experimentation or commercialisation. It also takes into account  the steps that were taken in order to prepare innovations for commercialisation, e.g. prototyping, demonstration or testing activities or a feasibility study, and to secure the  necessary technological resources, e.g. skills, to bring the innovation to the market. In  addition, this criterion takes into account the development stage of an innovation and the time to its potential commercialisation. Innovation management This criterion addresses the issue of the project consor - tium and its commitment to bringing an innovation to the market. This is often seen as  the most important success indicator of a technology venture (Meseri and Maital 2001;  Kirchberger and Pohl 2016). In broad terms, it is related to the assessment and manage-ment of risks associated with innovation commercialisation. It involves measures such as  securing resources, organizing the process and setting milestones for technology trans- fer. This requires commitment from the top management (Nevens 1990; Davenport et al. 1998). Interactions with external actors, e.g. potential customers or users, also increase the  chances of successful commercialisation of technologies (Gerard et  al. 2002). Thus, the  concept of innovation management aims
of technologies (Gerard et  al. 2002). Thus, the  concept of innovation management aims to capture how far the project’s development and/or management team are able to execute the necessary steps to transform an innovative  technology or research results into a marketable product and, finally, to prepare its com- mercialisation. These steps may include, for example, clarifying ownership and IPR issues,  preparing a business plan or market study, securing capital investment from public and/or  private sources, or engaging end-users in the project. Market potential A commercially viable innovation must demonstrate economic benefit.  The greater the benefit, the more desirable and marketable an innovation is. At the same time, the innovation commercialisation process involves acquiring ideas about existing or potential market needs and looking for solutions to satisfy them (Mitchell and Singh 1996).  The market potential criterion relates to the demand and supply side of an innovation. Regarding the demand side, it concerns the prospective size of the market for a product and  the chances of its successful commercialisation. It aims to assess how the product satis- fies a market sector and to indicate that there is a potential customer base. Market size and dynamics are among the most relevant factors behind a successful innovation commerciali- sation (Meseri and Maital 2001). With respect to the supply side, it aims to assess whether  there are potential barriers, e.g. regulatory frameworks or existing IPR issues, which could weaken the commercial exploitation of an innovation. In the current undertaking, the focus  is placed on the supply side. This is mostly because information on markets for individual  innovations is not available. In order to observe and measure the above-specified criteria, each of them was matched  with relevant questions in the Innovation Radar questionnaire. The outcome of the match-ing process is presented in more detail in prior studies on
questionnaire. The outcome of the match-ing process is presented in more detail in prior studies on the IR (De Prato et al. 2015;  Pesole and Nepelski 2016). Composite sub-indicators for each assessment criterion were  created, i.e. Innovation Readiness Indicator (IRI), Innovation Management Indicator (IMI), and Market Potential Indicator (MPI). In the second step, the Innovation Potential Indicator
368 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 (IPI) was constructed. IPI is an arithmetic composite indicator which aggregates the values  of the three earlier sub-indicators.2 As mentioned above, the conceptual framework of the Innovation Radar builds on the  extant literature on success factors of innovations (see Evanschitzky et  al. 2012; Kirch- berger and Pohl 2016 for recent surveys). Evanschitzky et al. (2012) provide a meta-anal- ysis of papers published between 1999 and 2011 to assess the effects of factors predicting success of new product innovations and compares the magnitude of these effects found in  a previous meta-analysis study of Henard and Szymanski (2001). Both meta-analysis stud- ies show large divergences in the magnitude of success factors of new product innovations.  Due to a lack of convergence about the magnitude of success factors in the previous litera- ture, we follow a conservative approach and opt to equally weight the sub-indicators of the Innovation Potential Indicator. With this approach we follow the perspective of scholars  claiming that successful development and commercialisation of a new technology is a mat- ter of competence in all factors and of balance and coordination between them and not doing one or two things brilliantly well (Cooper and Kleinschmidt 1988; Rothwell 1992;  Conceição et al. 2012). Hence, equal weighting is applied to construct the Innovation Potential Indicator as  follows: Observed values of the IPI indicator are brought to a scale between 0 and 100 multiply - ing the IPI by a score of 10. The left-hand side indicator of Eq. (1) measures the innova- tion potential of each EU-funded research project and serves as dependent variable in the regression analyses of Sect. 5. 3.2  Organisational and geographic diversity To construct the focus explanatory variables which measure the organisational and geo-graphic diversity in EU-funded collaborative research projects, IR survey data was comple- mented with information on projects’
collaborative research projects, IR survey data was comple- mented with information on projects’ characteristics retrieved from the CORDIS database  (Mankins 2009). This database is the European Commission’s public repository of infor - mation on all EU-funded research projects and their results. For the purpose of this study,  we retrieved, among others, information on the type and location of project participants,  which allowed us to create measures of organisational and geographic diversity at project  level. The organisational and geographic diversity measures are calculated as inverse Her - findahl indices. The Herfindahl index is among the most accepted measures of diversity in  the economic literature (Patil and Taillie 1982; McDonald and Dimmick 2003). It has been  widely used in the context of innovation and R&D collaborations to measure geographic (Beers and Zand 2014), organisational (Talke et  al. 2011; Von Raesfeld et  al. 2012) or technological diversity (Baum et al. 2000; Van de Vrande 2013). Organisational and geo- graphic diversity—respectively denoted as D pORG and DpGEO—are calculated as follows:(1) IPI=1 3IRI+1 3IMI+1 3MPI 2 Internal consistency of the different items into their respective aggregated sub-indicators rests upon theo- retical groundings of the literature and correlation analyses among the various items in each sub-indicator.  These analyses reveal significant positive correlations across the various items, indicating that each item uniquely contributes to the measurement in the construct they are intended to measure, i.e. market potential, innovation readiness and innovation management.
369 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 Indices DpORG and DpGEO sums the squared shares of respectively organisation type o and  country c in FP project p and deducts it from unity. Hence, the higher the values of DpORG  and DpGEO, the more diverse the distributions of organisation types and countries in the  research networks. 3.3  Project characteristics We control for other types of characteristics that may affect the innovation potential of EU- funded research projects. First, we include the geographic distance between the different  partners of the research consortium. Using geographical latitude and longitude information  from the Geonames geographical database, we calculate - for each partner of the project - the distances between its city and the cities of its co-partners with the great-circle distance  method. The geographical distance in a research project is then defined as the average of all  these distance measures. Second, we include two dummy variables that control for the maturity of the project,  denoted as interim review and final review. Each of them takes the value of 1 if the project is reviewed for the second or third time respectively and 0 otherwise. The reference group  is the first review of a project. The maturity of the research project might influence its  innovation potential in several ways. Time is a salient factor in developing a fertile ground for knowledge dissemination, assimilation and understanding within the project network  (Schwartz et al. 2012). It requires frequent social interactions between the research part- ners, which are essentially based on trust and reciprocity (Dahl and Pedersen 2004; Nie- dergassel and Leker 2011). However, the development of trust and reciprocity takes con- siderable time and requires continuous efforts from all cooperating partners. Hence, as the duration of the cooperation advances, trust-based relationships between research partners  strengthen, which further
advances, trust-based relationships between research partners  strengthen, which further reduces freeriding or opportunistic behaviour and increases the  project’s probability of innovative success (Morgan and Cooke 1998). Finally, we control for the amount of funding the project consortium received (project  funding) and for the total duration of the project (project duration). 4  Descriptive statistics Table  1 provides an overview of the sample of innovation projects and organisation types  that we have investigated in the current study. Between October 2014 and January 2016,  603 EU-funded collaborative research projects were reviewed using the Innovation Radar  questionnaire, including nearly 10% of all ICT FP7, CIP ICT PSP and Horizon2020 pro-jects. As a result, 1128 innovations were identified. This means that, on average, every  project produces nearly 2 innovations. The number of organisations active in these pro- jects amounted to 7193. We distinguished six types of organisations, including universi- ties, research centres, small –and medium-sized enterprises, large firms, governmental  institutions and others. Universities account for almost one third of the organisations, while research centres and the two types of firms have respective shares around 20%. The (2) DORG p=1−O/uni2211.s1 o=1(sop)2and DGEOp=1−C/uni2211.s1 c=1(scp)2
370 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 percentage of both the governmental institutions and other types of organisations amounts  to 6% and 5% respectively. Further insights at the project level are presented in Table  2, highlighting the number of  organisations, organisation types and represented countries per project. On average, every project involves twelve organisations and includes four different organisation types, active  in six different countries. These descriptive statistics demonstrate the aim of EU-funded  research frameworks to create institutionally and internationally diverse research networks.  Most of the projects include three to four different organisation types (65%), while the  share of projects having five to six types amounts to 23%. Only eleven projects report that they have one organisation type active in the innovation development (only involving uni- versities). Concerning the geographical dispersion of research partners, projects include at  least two different countries, and can include as many as 30 countries. Table  3 presents summary statistics of the 603 EU-funded research projects. Research  projects diverge widely in their innovation potential. The project with the highest score obtained 88.33 points, while the lowest-ranked project got only 14.08 points. Substantial  differences can also be observed for organisational and geographic diversity measures. The  table provides further details about project characteristics, including geographical distance across all research partners, project duration, project funding and the review stage. The  correlation table between the variables is included in the Appendix.Table 1  Overview of innovation projects and organisation types Data source based on the Innovation Radar by DG Connect (Pesole and Nepelski 2016) and CordisReview period 10/2014 and 01/2016 Number of reviewed projects 603 Number of innovations 1128 Number of organisations 7193  Universities 30%  Research centers 19%  Small- and medium
1128 Number of organisations 7193  Universities 30%  Research centers 19%  Small- and medium sized enterprises 21%  Large firms 19%  Governmental institutions 6%  Others 5% Table 2  Organisational and geographic dispersion at project level Data source based on the Innovation Radar by DG Connect (Pesole and Nepelski 2016) and CordisIndicator (per project) Mean SD Min. Max. Number of organisations 12.01 8.17 3 96 Number of organisation types 3.82 1.13 1 6 Number of countries 5.89 3.13 2 30
371 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 5  Empirical results We report the OLS estimations analysing the relationship between the organisational and  geographic diversity in EU-funded research projects and their innovation potential in  Table  4. The results reveal that organisational diversity in EU-funded research projects  has a positive effect on their innovation potential. In other words, research projects with a  greater heterogeneity of organisation partners have more innovation potential. In line with  previous studies, these findings point to the advantages of organisational diversity that may  arise through various means such as access to complementary assets (Teece 1986; Hage-doorn 1993), a wider range of capabilities and perspectives driven by a broader network of  relationships, and the promotion of knowledge diffusion (Ahuja 2000; Das and Teng 2000), among others. Though innovative outcomes of organisational collaborations may be nega-tively affected by the variety of institutional cultures, problems of distrust or differences in  objectives across organisations (Goerzen and Beamish 2005; Harryson et al. 2008; Pan- dza et al. 2011), the positive coefficient of the organisational diversity indicator suggests  that the beneficial effects of a wider diversity of organisation types outweigh the negative  impact of these challenges. The innovation potential of EU-funded research projects is negatively affected by geo- graphic diversity. This finding is consistent with the previous literature which points to  the challenges arising from collaborations with internationally-diverse partners. Research projects with a wider heterogeneity of international partners may encounter increased costs  of information transfer and face-to-face communications and difficulties due to language  differences (De Meyer 1993; Welch and Welch 2008). In column 2, we control for the geographical distance between the various organisations  of the research
2, we control for the geographical distance between the various organisations  of the research consortia. Contrary to our expectations, the geographical distance between partners has a positive impact on the innovation potential of research projects (Audretsch  and Feldman 1996; Asheim and Gertler 2005). This positive impact can be due to the  fact that we do not control for partner-specific characteristics (Branstetter and Sakakibara  2002). As such, the geographical distance indicator may capture the beneficial effects of  strong relational ties with more distant partners that possess the specialised knowledge needed for innovation development. In a similar context of strategic alliances, Capaldo and  Petruzzelli (2014) and Petruzzelli (2011) suggest that high geographical distance between Table 3  Descriptive statistics of EU-funded research projects Data source based on the Innovation Radar by DG Connect (Pesole and Nepelski 2016) and Cordis. Geo- graphical distance, project funding and project duration are expressed respectively in thousand kilometres, thousand euros and monthsVariables Obs Mean SD Min Max Innovation potential 603 49.21 14.08 14.17 88.33 Organisational diversity 603 0.62 0.14 0.00 0.79 Geographic diversity 603 0.75 0.08 0.45 0.96 Geographical distance 603 14.02 14.34 0.52 166.66 Final review 603 0.42 0.49 0.00 1.00 Interim review 603 0.34 0.48 0.00 1.00 Project funding 603 3587.43 2734.38 228.00 41,000.00 Project duration 603 37.94 6.52 16.00 67.00
372 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 partners can provide the alliance with the heterogeneous knowledge resources needed for  successful innovation. Both control variables – final review and interim review – which account for the maturity  of the research project are positive and significant. As research projects in the first review serve as a reference group, these findings indicate that the innovation potential of research  projects increases during the project. Concerning the remaining features of the research pro- jects, the amount of funding has a positive impact on innovation potential while the project  duration seems to negatively affect its innovative outcome. The positive effect of the amount  of resources that is devoted to an FP project is in line with findings of Schwartz et al. (2012) that explored a sample of German subsidised R&D cooperative projects. As both the dependent variable and the variables of interest are expressed as logarithms,  estimated coefficients can be interpreted as elasticities. A doubling of the degree of organi-sational diversity would increase the innovation potential of a project by 7.5 percent. In  sharp contrast, a doubling of the degree of geographic diversity would lead to a nearly  20 percent decrease of a project’s innovation potential. The negative impact of geographic  diversity increases to roughly 30 percent after controlling for the geographical distance. These results highlight the importance of the project design and in particular the rela- tively high negative impact of a large geographic diversity within the research consortium.  Although results provide an indication of the magnitude and importance of the diversity impact, caution is required in interpreting the directionality of the effects. Given the cross- sectional nature of the data, we cannot ascertain causality and should merely interpret  results as associations.Table 4  Organisational and geographic diversity and innovation potential of EU-funded research
4  Organisational and geographic diversity and innovation potential of EU-funded research projects All models report OLS regression estimates. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses *Significant at 10%, **significant at 5%, ***significant at 1%Innovation potential Organisational diversity 0.075*** 0.068*** (0.019) (0.020) Geographic diversity − 0.199* − 0.326** (0.109) (0.135) Geographical distance 0.038* (0.020) Final review 0.271*** 0.270*** (0.029) (0.029) Interim review 0.088*** 0.088*** (0.032) (0.032) Project funding 0.092*** 0.082*** (0.025) (0.026) Project duration − 0.142* − 0.133* (0.079) (0.080) Constant 2.839*** 2.559*** (0.311) (0.370) Observations 603 603 F-statistic 21.69*** 18.48*** R-squared 0.173 0.178
373 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 6  Conclusions Considering that the publically-funded research programmes produce technologies that  often form the basis for new products, services and markets, such instruments as the EC  Framework Programme improve the framework and systemic conditions of entrepreneurial  ecosystems. It accelerates the knowledge and technology production process and increases the stock of knowledge available to new technology-based firms. These firms are often the  vehicles for the commercialisation of new knowledge and technologies. The key element of  the EC FP is facilitating and exploiting the potential of diversified research networks. The level of diversity of EC FP is quite considerable. For example, during the  7 th Frame- work Programme, 25.000 projects out of more than 139.000 research proposals received  funding. Nearly 30.000 organisations participated to these projects. Universities and  research organisations accounted for over 71% of all participating organisations. Private companies, including SMEs, represented the second largest group (Fresco et al. 2015). The  Framework Programme by conception is a collaborative programme with global outreach  open to all researchers and research organisations irrespective of their country of origin.  FP7 has attained unprecedented levels of international participation by involving research- ers in retained proposals from as many as 170 countries from all continents (EC 2015). In this paper, we examined the impact of both organisational and geographic diversity  on the commercial potential of innovations developed by research networks funded by EU Framework Programmes. An extensive body of literature has analysed the advantages and drawbacks of organisational diversity in collaborative research and explored the various  challenges that can arise in collaborations with internationally-dispersed research part- ners. Not many studies have specifically assessed the
with internationally-dispersed research part- ners. Not many studies have specifically assessed the effect of diversity in Framework Pro- grammes. These studies were more descriptive in nature (Pandza et  al. 2011) and often  assessed the beneficial effects on firms’ economic performance from engaging in these collaborative research projects (Bayona-Sáez and García-Marco 2010; Barajas et al. 2012;  Aguiar and Gagnepain 2017). However, none of these studies investigated how the design of the research consortium in terms of organisational and geographic diversity related to the commercial potential of innovations of EU-funded collaborative research projects. Using a sample of 603 EU-funded collaborative research projects with an ICT theme,  this paper provides evidence of the importance of the composition of innovation partner - ships in research collaborations. Our findings suggest that projects with a wider diversity  in research partners are more likely to deliver innovations with a greater potential. This  indicates that these projects reap the benefits of the various advantages associated with  more organisational diversity such as greater learning opportunities, enhanced creativity  and access to a broader network of knowledge sources and competences. Although wider organisational diversity generates difficulties in reconciling the different objectives and  time-frames of the various types of research partners, the net effect of a more institution- ally diverse research team seems to be positive. In contrast, research networks with greater geographic diversity are associated with lower  levels of innovation potential. This finding is in line with the literature which suggests that a larger heterogeneity of international partners in collaborative projects may increase the costs  of information transfer and face-to-face communications (De Meyer 1993; Welch and Welch  2008). Contrary to our expectations, the geographical distance between partners has a positive
2008). Contrary to our expectations, the geographical distance between partners has a positive impact on the innovation potential of research projects. This lets us assume that organisations  choose their partners based on their specialised knowledge assets and that the geographic dis- tance does not prevent them from engaging in collaboration. This conjecture can be confirmed once information on partner-specific scientific and technological capabilities is available.
374 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 The construction of such a large research programme as the EC FP represents a major  challenge. Our results show that besides such elements as the duration of funding of pro- jects, the composition of the teams participating to them plays an equally important role.  Just as there are decreasing returns to the number of participants (Breschi and Malerba 2011), there are limits to diversity of the participating organisations. Our results show, in  particular, that the geographical mix poses a challenge and can create tensions within the  project consortia, which can reduce their performance. Thus, such requirements as, for  example, in the H2020 programme to create consortia of organisations including at least 3  participants from 3 different EU Member States or Associated countries may not necessar - ily increase the productivity of project consortia (EC 2018). Our sample is restricted to the ICT theme of the FP. We have however to acknowledge  that various scientific and technological domains exhibit specific dynamics and configura-tions (Bonaccorsi 2008). In particular, emerging and high-growth fields in science, such as  computer science, biotechnology and life sciences, materials sciences and nanotechnology,  are characterized by theme-specific degrees of diversity and of complementarities, both at the  cognitive and institutional level, requiring active cooperation forms between different disci- plines and actors. In order to achieve efficient productive settings, these theme-specific char - acteristics need to be taken into account while constructing heterogeneous collaborations. In the context of the ICT or digital theme, one needs to consider the issue of participa- tion of early-stage ventures in collaborative projects or the process of creation of such ven-tures with the objective of commercialisation of the research results. Young, technology- based enterprises, including start-ups and spin-offs, are the main vehicles through
technology- based enterprises, including start-ups and spin-offs, are the main vehicles through which  new knowledge from science and engineering is converted into economic benefits (Acs et al. 2009a; b). These companies are more likely than others to pursue opportunities asso- ciated with radical innovations that produce positive knowledge externalities and may have transformative consequences for the entire society (Baumol et al. 2007). This is particularly  true for ICT sector companies and digitally-enabled companies. By increasing the level of  participation of early-stage ventures in FP projects, the EC could accelerate the knowledge and technology production and commercialisation process. Our research was subject to a number of limitations, which may also suggest directions  for future research. First, we lacked information about the level of technological relatedness across industry partners within research networks, which had been reported in prior studies  as a relevant factor for the outcome of collaborations (Branstetter and Sakakibara 2002).  A greater degree of technological proximity between firms could facilitate the exchange,  the assimilation and the use of knowledge within the research consortium. If technological  divergence between the partners is large, an industry partner’s knowledge would be largely unexploitable for its counterparts. Hence, an interesting future research project would be to  construct a technological proximity measure based on patent information of the industry  partners. Second, linking industry partners to third-party databases would also allow us to control for the quality of firms active in the research project, including measures of firm  size, value added and productivity growth. Information on the use of VC funding by organ- isations participating to the EU-funded research projects would improve our understanding of the position and role of publically-funded research programmes within the entrepreneur - ial
of the position and role of publically-funded research programmes within the entrepreneur - ial ecosystems. It would cast light on the interplay between public and private sources of funding and the access to funding at each stage of technology development and commer - cialisation (Auerswald and Branscomb 2003). Third, the innovation potential of EU-funded research projects may also depend on the quality of other types of research partners. This calls for the inclusion of quality measures of universities, public research centres and gov - ernmental institutions in the estimation analyses.
375 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Interna- tional License (http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen ses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,  and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. Appendix See Table 5. References Acs, Z. J., Audretsch, D. B., & Strom, R. J. (2009a). Entrepreneurship, growth, and public policy. Cam- bridge: Cambridge University Press. Acs, Z. J., Braunerhjelm, P., Audretsch, D. B., & Carlsson, B. (2009b). The knowledge spillover theory of  entrepreneurship. Small Business Economics, 32(1), 15–30. Aguiar, L., & Gagnepain, P. (2017). European cooperative R&D and firm performance: Evidence based on  funding differences in key actions. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 53, 1–31. Ahonen, P., & Tienari, J. (2009). United in diversity? Disciplinary normalization in an EU project. Organi- zation, 16(5), 655–679. Ahuja, G. (2000). The duality of collaboration: inducements and opportunities in the formation of interfirm  linkages. Strategic Management Journal, 21(3), 317–343. Ahuja, G., & Lampert, M. C. (2001). Entrepreneurship in the large corporation: a longitudinal study of how  established firms create breakthrough inventions. Strategic Management Journal, 22(6–7), 521–543. Anselin, L., Varga, A., & Acs, Z. (1997). Local geographic spillovers between university research and high  technology innovations. Journal of Urban Economics, 42(3), 422–448. Archibugi, D., & Coco, A. (2004). International partnerships for knowledge in business and academia: A  comparison between Europe and the USA. Technovation, 24(7), 517–528. Aristei, D., Vecchi, M., & Venturini, F. (2016). University and inter-firm R&D collaborations: propensity  and intensity of
& Venturini, F. (2016). University and inter-firm R&D collaborations: propensity  and intensity of cooperation in Europe. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 41(4), 841–871. Arrow, K. (1962). Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention. In NBER (Ed.), The rate  and direction of inventive activity: Economic and social factors (pp. 609–626). Princeton: Princeton University Press. Asheim, B., & Gertler, M. (2005). Regional innovation systems and the geographical foundations of inno- vation. In J. Fagerberg, D. Mowery, & R. R. Nelson (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of innovation (pp. 291–317). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Astebro, T. (2004). Key success factors for technological entrepreneurs R&D projects. IEEE Transactions  on Engineering Management, 51(3), 381–399. Audretsch, D. B., & Feldman, M. P. (1996). R&D spillovers and the geography of innovation and produc- tion. The American Economic Review, 86(3), 630–640.Table 5  Correlation table Variables (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (1) Innovation potential 1.000 (2) Organisational diversity 0.173 1.000 (3) Geographic diversity 0.007 0.153 1.000 (4) Geographical distance 0.110 0.252 0.582 1.000 (5) Final review 0.337 0.038 0.053 0.027 1.000 (6) Interim review − 0.106 0.012 − 0.035 0.010 − 0.611 1.000 (7) Project funding 0.119 0.107 0.274 0.322 − 0.065 0.165 1.000 (8) Project duration 0.021 − 0.052 0.106 0.106 − 0.016 0.163 0.570 1.000
376 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 Audretsch, D. B., & Link, A. N. (2016). Essays in public sector entrepreneurship. Cham: Springer. Auerswald, P., & Branscomb, L. (2003). Valleys of death and Darwinian seas: financing the invention to  innovation transition in the United States. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 28(3), 227–239. Balachandra, R., & Friar, J. H. (1997). Factors for success in R&D projects and new product innovation: a  contextual framework. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 44(3), 276–287. Barajas, A., Huergo, E., & Moreno, L. (2012). Measuring the economic impact of research joint ventures  supported by the EU framework programme. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 37(6), 917–942. Baum, J. A. C., Calabrese, T., & Silverman, B. S. (2000). Don’t go it alone: alliance network composi- tion and startups’ performance in Canadian biotechnology. Strategic Management Journal, 21(3),  267–294. Baumol, W. J., Litan, R. E., & Schramm, C. J. (2007). Good capitalism, bad capitalism, and the economics  of growth and prosperity. New Haven: Yale University Press. Bayona-Sáez, C., & García-Marco, T. (2010). Assessing the effectiveness of the Eureka program. Research  Policy, 39(10), 1375–1386. Beers, C., & Zand, F. (2014). R&D cooperation, partner diversity, and innovation performance: an empirical  analysis. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 31(2), 292–312. Belderbos, R., Carree, M., & Lokshin, B. (2004). Cooperative R&D and firm performance. Research Policy,  33(10), 1477–1492. Bonaccorsi, A. (2008). Search regimes and the industrial dynamics of science. Minerva, 46(3), 285.Boschma, R. (2005). Proximity and innovation: a critical assessment. Regional Studies, 39(1), 61–74.Branstetter, L. G., & Sakakibara, M. (2002). When do research consortia work well and why? Evidence  from Japanese panel data. The American Economic Review, 92(1), 143–159. Breschi, S., & Malerba, F. (2011). Assessing the scientific and technological output of EU framework pro-
S., & Malerba, F. (2011). Assessing the scientific and technological output of EU framework pro- grammes: Evidence from the FP6 projects in the ICT field. Scientometrics, 88(1), 239–257. Brett, J., Behfar, K., & Kern, M. C. (2006). Managing multicultural teams. Harvard Business Review,  84(11), 84–91. Caloghirou, Y., Ioannides, S., & Vonortas, N. S. (2003). Research joint ventures. Journal of Economic Sur - veys,  17(4), 541–570. Caloghirou, Y., Tsakanikas, A., & Vonortas, N. (2001). University-Industry Cooperation in the context of  the European framework programmes. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(1–2), 153–161. Caloghirou, Y., Vonortas, N. S., & Ioannides, S. (2004). European collaboration in research and develop- ment: Business strategy and public policy. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing. Capaldo, A., & Petruzzelli, A. M. (2014). Partner geographic and organizational proximity and the innova- tive performance of knowledge-creating alliances. European Management Review, 11(1), 63–84. Carayol, N. (2003). Objectives, agreements and matching in science–industry collaborations: reassembling  the pieces of the puzzle. Research Policy, 32(6), 887–908. Coad, A., Amoroso, S., & Grassano, N. (2017). Diversity in one dimension alongside greater similarity in  others: evidence from FP7 cooperative research teams. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 42(5),  1170–1183. Cohen, W. M., & Levinthal, D. A. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and innova- tion. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(1), 128–152. Conceição, O., Fontes, M., & Calapez, T. (2012). The commercialisation decisions of research-based spin- off: Targeting the market for technologies. Technovation, 32(1), 43–56. Cooper, R. G., & Kleinschmidt, E. J. (1988). Resource allocation in the new product process. Industrial  Marketing Management, 17(3), 249–262. Cooper, R. G., & Kleinschmidt, E. J. (1997). Winning businesses in product development: The critical suc- cess factors. The
E. J. (1997). Winning businesses in product development: The critical suc- cess factors. The Journal of Product Innovation Management, 14(2), 132. Cox, T. (1993). Cultural diversity in organizations: Theory, research and practice. San Francisco, CA:  Barrett-Koehler. Cox, T. H., & Blake, S. (1991). Managing cultural diversity: Implications for organizational competi- tiveness. The Executive, 5(3), 45–56. Dahl, M. S., & Pedersen, C. Ø. (2004). Knowledge flows through informal contacts in industrial clusters:  Myth or reality? Research Policy, 33(10), 1673–1686. Das, T. K., & Teng, B.-S. (2000). A resource-based theory of strategic alliances. Journal of Manage- ment, 26(1), 31–61. Davenport, S., Davies, J., & Grimes, C. (1998). Collaborative research programmes: Building trust from  difference. Technovation, 19(1), 31–40. De Coster, R., & Butler, C. (2005). Assessment of proposals for new technology ventures in the UK:  Characteristics of university spin-off companies. Technovation, 25(5), 535–543.
377 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 De Meyer, A. (1993). Management of an international network of industrial R&D laboratories. R&D  Management, 23(2), 109–120. De Prato, G., Nepelski, D. & Piroli, G. (2015). Innovation Radar: Identifying innovations and innovators  with high potential in ICT FP7, CIP & H2020 Projects, Joint Research Centre, science for policy  report-EUR 27314 EN. https ://doi.org/10.2791/61591 . Di Cagno, D., Fabrizi, A., & Meliciani, V. (2014). The impact of participation in European joint research  projects on knowledge creation and economic growth. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 39(6),  836–858. Doz, Y. L., & Hamel, G. (1997). The use of alliances in implementing technology strategies. In M. L.  Tushman & P. Anderson (Eds.), Managing strategic innovation and change: A collection of read-ings (pp. 1–41). New York: Oxford University Press. Duysters, G., & Lokshin, B. (2011). Determinants of alliance portfolio complexity and its effect on inno- vative performance of companies. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 28(4), 570–585. EC. (2014). Horizon 2020 Work Programme 2014–2015: Leadership in enabling and industrial tech- nologies—information and communication technologies. Luxembourg: Office for Official Publica-tions of the European Communities. EC. (2015). Seventh FP7 monitoring report: Monitoring report 2013. Luxembourg: Publications Office  of the European Union. EC. (2016). Ex-Post Evaluation of the 7th EU framework programme (2007–2013). Luxembourg: Publi- cations Office of the European Union. EC. (2018). Participant Portal. H2020 Online Manual. http://ec.europ a.eu/resea rch/parti cipan ts/docs/ h2020 -fundi ng-guide /index _en.htm. Accessed 20 Mar 2018. Eisenhardt, K. M., & Schoonhoven, C. B. (1996). Resource-based view of strategic alliance formation:  Strategic and social effects in entrepreneurial firms. Organization Science, 7(2), 136–150. Ely, R. J., & Thomas, D. A. (2001). Cultural diversity
firms. Organization Science, 7(2), 136–150. Ely, R. J., & Thomas, D. A. (2001). Cultural diversity at work: The effects of diversity perspectives on  work group processes and outcomes. Administrative Science Quarterly, 46(2), 229–273. Evanschitzky, H., Eisend, M., Calantone, R. J., & Jiang, Y. (2012). Success factors of product innova- tion: An updated meta-analysis. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 29(S1), 21–37. Faems, D., Van Looy, B., & Debackere, K. (2005). Interorganizational collaboration and innovation:  toward a portfolio approach. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 22(3), 238–250. Freeman, C. (1991). Networks of innovators: A synthesis of research issues. Research Policy, 20(5),  499–514. Fresco, L., Martinuzzi, A., Butkus, E., Cosnard, M., Hallen, A., Harayama, Y., Herlitschka, S., Kuhl- mann, S., Nedeltcheva, V., Pelly, R., Anvret, M. & Bustelo, M. (2015). Commitment and coher - ence. Ex-post-evaluation of the 7th EU framework programme (2007–2013). Fuerlinger, G., Fandl, U., & Funke, T. (2015). The role of the state in the entrepreneurship ecosystem:  Insights from Germany. Triple Helix, 2–3(1), 1–26. Galbraith, C. S., Ehrlich, S. B., & DeNoble, A. F. (2006). Predicting technology success: Identifying key  predictors and assessing expert evaluation for advanced technologies. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 31(6), 673–684. Gampfer, R., Mitchell, J., Stamenov, B., Zifciakova, J. & Jonkers, K. (2016). Improving access to  finance: which schemes best support the emergence of high-growth innovative enterprises? A mapping, analysis and assessment of finance instruments in selected EU Member States, Joint Research Centre, science for policy report-EUR 28084 EN. https ://doi.org/10.2791/63575 7. Gerard, G., Shaker, Z., & Robley, W. (2002). The effects of business—university alliances on innovative  output and financial performance: A study of publicly traded biotechnology companies. Journal of  Business Venturing, 17(6), 577–609. Goerzen,
publicly traded biotechnology companies. Journal of  Business Venturing, 17(6), 577–609. Goerzen, A., & Beamish, P. W. (2005). The effect of alliance network diversity on multinational enterprise  performance. Strategic Management Journal, 26(4), 333–354. Griffin, A. (1997). Modeling and measuring product development cycle time across industries. Journal of  Engineering and Technology Management, 14(1), 1–24. Gulati, R. (1999). Network location and learning: The influence of network resources and firm capabilities  on alliance formation. Strategic Management Journal, 20(5), 397–420. Hagedoorn, J. (1993). Understanding the rationale of strategic technology partnering: Nterorganizational  modes of cooperation and sectoral differences. Strategic Management Journal, 14(5), 371–385. Hagedoorn, J., & Kranenburg, H. (2003). Growth patterns in R&D partnerships: An exploratory statistical  study. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 21(4), 517–531. Hagedoorn, J., Link, A., & Vonortas, N. (2000). Research partnerships. Research Policy, 29(4–5), 567–586.Hansen, M. T. (1999). The search-transfer problem: The role of weak ties in sharing knowledge across  organization subunits. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(1), 82–111.
378 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 Harryson, S., Kliknaite, S., & Dudkowski, R. (2008). Flexibility in innovation through external learning:  exploring two models for enhanced industry? University collaboration. International Journal of Tech- nology Management, 41(1–2), 109–137. Henard, D. H., & Szymanski, D. M. (2001). Why some new products are more successful than others. Jour - nal of Marketing Research, 38(3), 362–375. Hennart, J.-F., & Zeng, M. (2002). Cross-cultural differences and joint venture longevity. Journal of Inter - national Business Studies, 33(4), 699–716. Hernán, R., Marín, P. L., & Siotis, G. (2003). An empirical evaluation of the determinants of Research Joint  Venture Formation. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 51(1), 75–89. Heslop, L. A., McGregor, E., & Griffith, M. (2001). Development of a technology readiness assessment  measure: The cloverleaf model of technology transfer. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(4),  369–384. Hoegl, M., & Proserpio, L. (2004). Team member proximity and teamwork in innovative projects. Research  Policy, 33(8), 1153–1165. Jaffe, A. B., Trajtenberg, M., & Henderson, R. (1993). Geographic localization of knowledge spillovers as  evidenced by patent citations. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(3), 577–598. Keller, R. T. (1986). Predictors of the performance of project groups in R&D organizations. Academy of  Management Journal, 29(4), 715–726. Kirchberger, M. A., & Pohl, L. (2016). Technology commercialization: A literature review of success fac- tors and antecedents across different contexts. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 41(5), 1077–1112. Kogut, B. (1988). Joint ventures: Theoretical and empirical perspectives. Strategic Management Journal,  9(4), 319–332. Laursen, K., & Salter, A. (2006). Open for innovation: the role of openness in explaining innovation perfor - mance among UK manufacturing firms. Strategic Management Journal, 27(2), 131–150. Lavie, D., & Miller, S. R. (2008). Alliance portfolio
Strategic Management Journal, 27(2), 131–150. Lavie, D., & Miller, S. R. (2008). Alliance portfolio internationalization and firm performance. Organiza- tion Science, 19(4), 623–646. Lehmann, E. E., & Menter, M. (2016). University–industry collaboration and regional wealth. The Journal  of Technology Transfer, 41(6), 1284–1307. Lerner, J., & Merges, R. P. (1998). The control of technology alliances: An empirical analysis of the bio- technology industry. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 46(2), 125–156. Leyden, D. (2016). Public-sector entrepreneurship and the creation of a sustainable innovative economy.  Small Business Economics, 46(4), 553–564. Liao, P., & Witsil, A. (2008). A practical guide to opportunity assessment methods. New-York: Research  Triangle Park, RTI Press. Link, A. N. (2016). Public sector entrepreneurship: Introduction to the special section. Economia e Politica  Industriale, 43(4), 355–356. Linton, J. D., Walsh, S. T., & Morabito, J. (2002). Analysis, ranking and selection of R&D projects in a  portfolio. R&D Management, 32(2), 139–148. Luukkonen, T. (1998). The difficulties in assessing the impact of EU framework programmes. Research  Policy, 27(6), 599–610. Luukkonen, T. (2000). Additionality of EU framework programmes1. Research Policy, 29(6), 711–724. Mankins, J. (2009). Technology readiness assessments: A retrospective. Acta Astronautica, 65(9–10),  1216–1223. Mazzucato, M. (2013). The entrepreneurial state: debunking public vs. private sector myths. London:  Anthem Press. Mazzucato, M. (2016). From market fixing to market-creating: A new framework for innovation policy.  Industry and Innovation, 23(2), 140–156. McDonald, D. G., & Dimmick, J. (2003). The conceptualization and measurement of diversity. Communica- tion Research, 30(1), 60–79. Meseri, O., & Maital, S. (2001). A survey analysis of university-technology transfer in Israel: Evaluation of  projects and determinants of success. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(1), 115–125.
of  projects and determinants of success. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(1), 115–125. Meyer-Krahmer, F., & Reger, G. (1999). New perspectives on the innovation strategies of multinational  enterprises: Lessons for technology policy in Europe. Research Policy, 28(7), 751–776. Miles, G., Preece, S. B., & Baetz, M. C. (1999). Dangers of dependence: The impact of strategic alliance  use by small technology-based firms. Journal of Small Business Management, 37(2), 20. Mitchell, W., & Singh, K. (1996). Survival of businesses using collaborative relationships to commercialize  complex goods. Strategic Management Journal, 17(3), 169–196. Montoya-Weiss, M. M., & Calantone, R. (1994). Determinants of new product performance: A review and  meta-analysis. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 11(5), 397–417.
379 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 Mora-Valentin, E. M., Montoro-Sanchez, A., & Guerras-Martin, L. A. (2004). Determining factors in the  success of R&D cooperative agreements between firms and research organizations. Research Policy,  33(1), 17–40. Morgan, K., & Cooke, P. (1998). The associational economy: Firms, regions, and innovation. New-York:  Oxford University Press. Nelson, R. R. (1959). The simple economics of basic scientific research. Journal of Political Economy,  67(3), 297–306. Nepelski, D., & Piroli, G. (2018). Organizational diversity and innovation potential of EU-funded research  projects. Journal of Technology Transfer, 43(3), 615–639. Nevens, M. (1990). Commercializing technology: What the best companies do. Planning Review, 18(6),  20–24. Niedergassel, B., & Leker, J. (2011). Different dimensions of knowledge in cooperative R&D projects of  university scientists. Technovation, 31(4), 142–150. Oxley, J. E. (1997). Appropriability hazards and governance in strategic alliances: A transaction cost  approach. Journal of Law Economics and Organization, 13(2), 387–409. Pandza, K., Wilkins, T., & Alfoldi, E. (2011). Collaborative diversity in a nanotechnology innovation sys- tem: Evidence from the EU framework programme. Technovation, 31(9), 476–489. Patil, G., & Taillie, C. (1982). Diversity as a concept and its measurement. Journal of the American Statisti- cal Association, 77(379), 548–561. Pavitt, K. (2005). Innovation processes. In J. Fagerberg, D. Mowery, & R. Nelson (Eds.), The Oxford hand- book of innovation (pp. 86–114). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Pesole, A. & Nepelski, D. (2016). Universities and collaborative innovation in EC-funded research projects:  An analysis based on innovation radar data, Joint Research Centre, science for policy report-EUR 28355 EN. https ://doi.org/10.2791/24494 9. Petruzzelli, A. M. (2011). The impact of technological relatedness, prior ties, and geographical distance on
A. M. (2011). The impact of technological relatedness, prior ties, and geographical distance on  university–industry collaborations: A joint-patent analysis. Technovation, 31(7), 309–319. Pisano, G. P. (1990). The R&D boundaries of the firm: an empirical analysis. Administrative Science Quar - terly,  35(1), 153–176. Polt, W., Vonortas, N., & Fisher, R. (2008). The impact of publicly funded research on innovation: An  analysis of European framework programmes for research and development. Brussels: European Commission. Powell, W. W., & Brantley, P. (1992). Competitive cooperation in biotechnology: Learning through net- works. In N. Nohria & R. Eccles (Eds.), Networks and organizations: Structure, form and action (pp. 366–394). Boston: Harvard Business School Press. Powell, W. W., Koput, K. W., & Smith-Doerr, L. (1996). Interorganizational collaboration and the locus of  innovation: Networks of learning in biotechnology. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41(1), 116–145. Protogerou, A., Caloghirou, Y., & Siokas, E. (2013). Twenty-five years of science–industry collaboration:  the emergence and evolution of policy-driven research networks across Europe. The Journal of Tech-nology Transfer, 38(6), 873–895. Röller, L.-H., Siebert, R., & Tombak, M. (2007). Why firms form (or do not form) RJVs. The Economic  Journal, 117(522), 1122–1144. Rothwell, R. (1992). Successful industrial innovation: Critical factors for the 1990s. R&D Management,  22(3), 221–240. Schwartz, M., Peglow, F., Fritsch, M., & Günther, J. (2012). What drives innovation output from subsidized  R&D cooperation?—Project-level evidence from Germany. Technovation, 32(6), 358–369. Stahl, G. K., Maznevski, M. L., Voigt, A., & Jonsen, K. (2010). Unraveling the effects of cultural diversity  in teams: A meta-analysis of research on multicultural work groups. Journal of International Business Studies, 41(4), 690–709. Stam, E. & Spigel, B. (2016). Entrepreneurial ecosystems, Utrecht School of Economics. Discussion
Stam, E. & Spigel, B. (2016). Entrepreneurial ecosystems, Utrecht School of Economics. Discussion paper  series nr: 16–13. Talke, K., Salomo, S., & Kock, A. (2011). Top management team diversity and strategic innovation orien- tation: The relationship and consequences for innovativeness and performance. Journal of Product  Innovation Management, 28(6), 819–832. Teece, D. J. (1986). Profiting from technological innovation: Implications for integration, collaboration,  licensing and public policy. Research Policy, 15(6), 285–305. Van de Vrande, V. (2013). Balancing your technology-sourcing portfolio: How sourcing mode diversity  enhances innovative performance. Strategic Management Journal, 34(5), 610–621. Van Roy, V. & Nepelski, D. (2016). Assessment of framework conditions for the creation and growth of  firms in Europe, Joint Research Centre, science for policy report–EUR 28167 EN. https ://doi.org/10.2791/2811.
380 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 Van Roy, V. & Nepelski, D. (2017). Determinants of high-tech entrepreneurship in Europe, Joint Research  Centre, science for policy report–EUR 28299 EN. https ://doi.org/10.2791/96153 . Von Raesfeld, A., Geurts, P., Jansen, M., Boshuizen, J., & Luttge, R. (2012). Influence of partner diver - sity on collaborative public R&D project outcomes: A study of application and commercialization of  nanotechnologies in the Netherlands. Technovation, 32(3), 227–233. Welch, D. E., & Welch, L. S. (2008). The importance of language in international knowledge transfer. Man- agement International Review, 48(3), 339–360. Zucker, L. G. (1986). Production of trust: Institutional sources of economic structure, 1840–1920. Research  in Organizational Behavior, 8, 53–111.
Vol.:(0123456789)The Journal of Technology Transfer (2019) 44:359–380 https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-018-9692-2 1 3 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation  potential of EU‑funded research networks Daniel Nepelski1 · Vincent Van Roy1 · Annarosa Pesole1 Published online: 14 September 2018  © The Author(s) 2018 Abstract Public funding of research improves the systemic conditions of entrepreneurial ecosystems.  It provides early-stage financing to technologies that form the basis for new products and  services. In addition to financial support, instruments as the EC Framework Programmes  (FP) facilitate the creation of research networks. By bringing together organisations of  various types and geographic origins and increasing the diversity of their interactions,  the instrument seeks to accelerate a discovery process in which organisations attempt to  bring desired innovations to the market and society. In this paper, we examine the impact  of organisational and geographic diversity of partnerships in EU-funded research networks  on the commercial potential of their innovations. We explore a sample of 603 collaborative  research projects supported by European FPs. We use data from the Innovation Radar, a  unique survey database developed by DG CONNECT to assess the innovation outcomes  of FP projects in ICT. We show that innovations developed by research networks with a  higher organisational diversity have more commercial potential. This finding supports the  idea that policies improving systemic conditions of entrepreneurship ecosystems through  the creation of institutionally diverse research networks can have beneficial effects on the  commercialisation potential of innovations developed in FP projects. In contrast, research  networks with a wider range of internationally dispersed research partners are likely to  have less innovation potential. This may suggest the existence of coordination and commu - nication difficulties in FP projects where --- may suggest the existence of coordination and commu - nication difficulties in FP projects where geographic diversity is greater. Keywords  Research networks · Innovation policy · Framework programme · Diversity JEL Classification  L52 · L53 · O31 · O32 · O25 Disclaimer: The views expressed are purely those of the authors and may not in any circumstances be  regarded as stating an official position of the European Commission.  * Vincent Van Roy   vincent.van -roy@ec.europa.eu 1 Joint Research Centre (JRC), European Commission, Calle del Inca Garcilaso 3, 41092 Seville,  Spain --- It is expected to increase the level of  innovation and to facilitate discovery of cross-border applications and solutions. In this context, an important question for policy makers is: to what extent is a greater  degree of organisational and geographic diversity in EU-funded collaborative research networks beneficial to their economic outcomes. In this paper, we explore the innovation  potential of EU-funded collaborative research networks and investigate how this potential  is related to the degree of organisational and geographic diversity of organisations involved  in the development of innovations. We analysed a sample of 603 collaborative research net-works from various EU-funded FPs. An extensive body of literature has explored the benefits and drawbacks of organisa- tional and geographic diversity in collaborative research networks and strategic alliances (e.g. Belderbos et al. 2004; Laursen and Salter 2006; Duysters and Lokshin 2011). Overall,  a greater diversity in the type of research partners opens up greater opportunities for inter- organisational learning (Luukkonen 1998, 2000), provides access to diverse competencies  (Kogut 1988; Hagedoorn 1993; Caloghirou et al. 2001), leads to a greater variety of ideas  and creativity and contributes to more effective problem solving. At the same time, institu-tionally more diverse research consortia face difficulties due to differences in institutional  culture across research partners (Goerzen and Beamish 2005; Pandza et al. 2011). In addi- tion, managerial problems may arise when the various organisations engaged in collabora-tive projects attempt to reconcile their different objectives and time-frames (Harryson et al.  2008). Finally, a greater degree of geographic diversity in collaborative research networks  is generally associated with greater coordination and transaction costs. This paper contributes in various ways to the literature on this topic. First, it focuses on  the collective performance of --- various ways to the literature on this topic. First, it focuses on  the collective performance of research projects. So far, impact assessment studies of EU-funded collaborative research projects have mainly explored how participating in these pro- jects has affected aspects of firms’ economic performance, such as profitability or employ - ment change (Bayona-Sáez and García-Marco 2010; Barajas et  al. 2012; Aguiar and --- 361 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 Gagnepain 2017). Second, it exploits a unique survey database developed by DG CON- NECT that provides valuable information about both the innovators participating in EU- funded collaborative research projects with an ICT theme and the innovations developed  by them (De Prato et al. 2015; Nepelski and Piroli 2018). This allows us to approach the notion of innovation from a holistic perspective in which innovation potential is not merely  measured by innovation output, i.e. filed patent applications. In this paper, the innovation  potential of EU-funded research projects is measured as a composite indicator which cap- tures various determining dimensions of the innovation and technology development pro- cess, including the levels of innovation readiness, management and market potential. The remainder of this article is structured as follows. Section  2 briefly reviews the rel- evant existing literature on the benefits and drawbacks of organisational and geographic diversity in collaborative research settings. It presents the most recent literature on impact assessments of Framework Programmes. 1 This is followed by a description of the method- ology and data sources used to measure innovation potential and diversity in EU-funded  research networks. Descriptive statistics are given in Sect.  4 and the empirical results in  Sect.  5. Finally Sect.  6 offers some concluding remarks and recommendations for future  research. 2  Previous literature Since 1984, the European Commission has launched several Framework Programmes (FP)  to support cooperative R&D within the European Union. The main objectives of these pro- grammes are to sustain and enhance the international competitiveness of European indus- try and to increase the wellbeing of citizens (Caloghirou et al. 2004). FPs allocate public funding specifically to research consortia which involve partners from various countries  and institutional --- specifically to research consortia which involve partners from various countries  and institutional settings to carry out collaborative research projects. Usually these consor - tia are made up of firms (SMEs and large firms), universities, public research centres and government institutions (Barajas et al. 2012). Public interventions of this kind are traditionally seen as mechanisms to overcome mar - ket failures. Market failures can arise when firms cannot preclude dissemination of knowl-edge to competitors and hence are prevented from fully appropriating the returns of their  R&D efforts. This may lead to lower investment in innovation activity than is socially desirable (Nelson 1959; Arrow 1962). The FPs incorporate two types of public policies  that are commonly used to reduce this market failure. First, FP projects must be co-funded  through grants from the European Commission and private funds from consortia partners.  The use of direct financial support for R&D by means of grants incentivises firms to pur - sue socially valuable R&D projects that would not be conducted otherwise. Second, FPs  are designed to encourage close and strategic R&D collaboration among different part- ners. This collaboration makes it possible to partially internalise knowledge leaks and thus  increases the appropriability of returns within the research consortia. In addition to the intervention to solve market failures, FPs also play a more active and  mission-oriented role in creating and encouraging new market opportunities and in devel-oping emerging sectors (Audretsch and Link 2016; Leyden 2016; Mazzucato 2016). In this  1 We acknowledge that the impact of organisational and geographic diversity on innovation performance  has received ample attention in the scientific literature (e.g. Belderbos et al. 2004; Laursen and Salter 2006;  Duysters and Lokshin 2011). However, we restrict the literature review to the handful of publications that  provide evidence for publicly-funded --- the literature review to the handful of publications that  provide evidence for publicly-funded research projects to target more closely the main subject of this paper. --- 362 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 respect, FPs serve as policy tools that shape the directionality of technology and economic  transformations. By fostering the creation and consolidation of institutionally and inter - nationally diverse research networks within the European area, FPs facilitate discovery of cross-border applications and solutions. One of the objectives of FPs is to tackle large-scale societal challenges and complex research projects that require relevant knowledge  more likely to be found in networks of organisations. Thus, publically-funded research  programmes such as the FPs have a threefold impact on systemic conditions of entrepre- neurship ecosystems. First, they provide finance for high-risk projects with uncertain com- mercial potential. Second, they direct and accelerate the process of novel, market-creating technologies. Third, they increase the level of connectedness between organisations of var - ious types, background and roles in the economy and society. In line with these considerations, the economic and societal impacts of research net- works and in particular FPs are manifold. First, FPs have been particularly success- ful in incorporating smaller and peripheral communities in the wider European network,  strengthening the research integration and cohesion in Europe (Protogerou et  al. 2013).  Second, research networks are effective for both the creation and diffusion of knowledge  and technologies, which can further spur regional or national wealth and competitiveness (Lehmann and Menter 2016). Analysing a panel of countries that participated in FP over  the period 1994-2005, Di Cagno et al. (2014) find that participation in EU-funded research  projects is an important channel of knowledge transfer. New knowledge produced within research networks can for instance spill over to the local market by means of labour mobil- ity, patent licensing and research contacts. Finally, besides the beneficial societal impact  of the creation of new --- and research contacts. Finally, besides the beneficial societal impact  of the creation of new technologies and spillover effects, research networks can lead to the creation of new firms that emerge during the collaborative efforts. To increase the economic and societal impact of research networks, a better under - standing of the formation of the networks in terms of the organisational and geographic  diversity of participating entities and their economic outcome is of great importance. The  impact of both organisational and geographic diversity in collaborative research networks has been extensively explored. As organisations and nations provide institutional and  national boundaries for groups of people with different cultural backgrounds, the litera- ture on organisational and geographic diversity relate extensively to the literature on cul-tural diversity. To a large extent the variety of cultural backgrounds of individuals shapes  the diversity in terms of education, know-how, experiences and objectives in organisations  and defines the advantages and drawbacks of collaborative endeavours in a setting with  multiple organisations and countries. A large strand of literature has analysed the effect  of cultural diversity on individual, group and organisational outcomes (Cox 1993). The most recurrent arguments highlighting the positive advantages of cultural diversity are the  access to a broad base of talent thriving creativity, a better problem-solving capacity and a  better ability in dealing with complex issues (Cox and Blake 1991; Ely and Thomas 2001). Common drawbacks of a large cultural diversity are increased costs in time and financial  resources due to conflicts and communication issues (Brett et al. 2006; Stahl et al. 2010). Performing an in-depth study by means of interviews of a small EU project funded by  the Framework Programme, Ahonen and Tienari (2009) highlight the importance of diver - sity management in an institutional diversified setting --- (2009) highlight the importance of diver - sity management in an institutional diversified setting with transnational organisations. The  authors mainly analyse power relations and the role of knowledge. In line with their dis- cussion and the literature on cultural diversity, we provide below a detailed overview of  the advantages and disadvantages of organisational and geographic diversity in research networks. --- 363 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 2.1  Organisational diversity Given the increasing complexity of innovations and the limited resources and competen- cies of individual organisations, the number of research collaborations has grown rapidly  during the last few decades (Hagedoorn and Kranenburg 2003; Faems et al. 2005; Pavitt  2005; Aristei et al. 2016). The rapid development of research carried out in collaboration by different types of organisations is driven by several advantages. Working together with other organisations gives research partners access to knowledge  and complementary assets that they do not possess in-house (Teece 1986; Hagedoorn  1993; Powell et  al. 1996). Conducting research and development with external partners  allows partners to create and mobilize more resources than would be possible through their individual efforts (Das and Teng 2000). Collaborative research reduces the risks associ- ated with the R&D-intensive projects, but requires enough internal R&D knowledge on the  part of the research partners to understand, assimilate and exploit the accessed or acquired external technology (Cohen and Levinthal 1990). Overall, research collaborations with dif- ferent types of partners serve as conduits for information and learning and are of strategic  importance in the diffusion of tacit and codified knowledge (Eisenhardt and Schoonhoven  1996; Doz and Hamel 1997; Ahuja 2000). Hence, research collaborations are seen as effec- tive means of getting information about new practices and they serve as a radar function  to screen promising new technologies (Freeman 1991; Powell and Brantley 1992; Ahuja  2000; Ahuja and Lampert 2001). Luukkonen (1998, 2000) investigated the benefits of participating in Framework Pro- grammes. He reported that improvement of skills, expansion of research lines and access  to larger networks of contacts and capabilities were among the most frequently mentioned  advantages of European --- of contacts and capabilities were among the most frequently mentioned  advantages of European Framework Programmes. At the same time, greater heterogeneity of organisation types in research collaborations  can be a hindrance to the economic performance of research networks. The potential ben-efits of organisational diversity may be consumed by greater communication and infor - mation exchange problems, differences in institutional culture (Zucker 1986; Hennart and Zeng 2002), incompatible reward systems (e.g. publications versus commercial products  and services), managerial issues and barriers to trust (Goerzen and Beamish 2005; Pandza  et al. 2011). Analysing research collaborations in FP projects, Archibugi and Coco (2004)  show that firms may be reluctant to engage in collaborative partnerships for competitive  reasons. Similarly, Röller et al. (2007) show that large firms are less willing to share their  economic knowledge with smaller rivals and prefer to collaborate with other large firms in  order to maximise the internalisation of spillovers. According to Harryson et  al. (2008), another fundamental issue in interorganisational  collaboration arises from having to reconcile different objectives, time-frames and from finding optimal network structures for innovation. For SMEs, alliances with external part- ners are often driven by a lack of internal financial resources or technological and mana- gerial competences (Lerner and Merges 1998). Accordingly, SMEs have a strong strategic alignment with FP projects and explicit goals related to innovation outputs such as develop- ing a prototype, a patentable technology, or a complementary technology that will directly  enhance their competitiveness (Polt et al. 2008). They focus on projects with an applied ori- entation and engage only in cooperative agreements that are likely to yield tangible benefits  and guarantee their immediate survival and growth (Miles et al. 1999; Baum et al. 2000). Large firms appeared --- ticated, specialised and tacit knowledge from various local sources (Meyer-Krahmer and Reger 1999; Lavie and Miller 2008). Diversity of national backgrounds extends the scope  of accessible knowledge bases and provides access to network resources that may spur innovation (Gulati 1999). However, greater geographic diversity entails higher coordination and transaction costs  (Hagedoorn et al. 2000; Caloghirou et al. 2003; Caloghirou et al. 2004; Goerzen and Beam-ish 2005). Research collaborations characterised by large international heterogeneity are  much more complex and difficult to manage. Difficulties in assimilating and coordinating operations across national borders are driven by a lack of face-to-face communications, lan-guage barriers and higher costs of information transfer. In addition, when research collabora- tion involves a wide diversity of internationally dispersed research partners, there is greater  difficulty in specifying intellectual property rights, legally enforcing intellectual property,  and monitoring partner activities (Pisano 1990; Oxley 1997), which further increases trans- action costs. The difficulties that geographic diversity brings along may contribute to the creation of smaller informal clusters within the collaborative research project, which can  potentially affect the overall coherence of the project (Goerzen and Beamish 2005). Besides geographic diversity, the geographical proximity between research partners is  recognised as a salient factor, which affects collective innovative endeavours (Audretsch and Feldman 1996; Asheim and Gertler 2005; Boschma 2005). Geographical proxim- ity between research partners is of crucial importance in getting access to tacit and non-codified knowledge from other partners, given that knowledge spillovers are geographi- cally bounded (Jaffe et  al. 1993; Anselin et  al. 1997). Larger distance may increase  communication and coordination difficulties between research partners, and may hamper --- 365 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 the innovation potential of cooperative projects (Keller 1986; Hoegl and Proserpio 2004;  Mora-Valentin et al. 2004). 2.3  Impact assessment of Framework Programmes Despite the long-term tradition of EU-wide public support for R&D in the form of Frame- work Programmes, studies evaluating the impact of these interventions on research pro- jects’ innovation performance remain relatively scarce. Impact assessment studies of FPs  have mainly explored the effect of firms’ participation on their economic performance, such as profitability or employment change (Bayona-Sáez and García-Marco 2010; Bara- jas et al. 2012; Aguiar and Gagnepain 2017). In their analysis of a sample of firms active  in FP projects, Aguiar and Gagnepain (2017) showed that participation in the Framework  Programme led to a considerable increase in labour productivity though the effect on profit  margins remained limited. Similarly, Barajas et al. (2012) found that participating in FPs had a positive impact on Spanish manufacturing firms’ technological capabilities, which  indirectly translated into an increase of labour productivity. Bayona-Sáez and García- Marco 2010 found that the completion of an FP project had a positive impact on firm per - formance measured as return over assets. Notable exceptions are the studies of Nepelski and Piroli (2018) and Schwartz et  al.  (2012). Nepelski and Piroli (2018) analysed the relationship between the diversity of  research partners in FP projects and the potential of their innovations. The authors show  that the innovative potential of research output of homogenous partnerships, e.g. between two SMEs or two large companies, is likely to be higher than that of heterogeneous part- nerships, e.g. an SME and a large company. In contrast to the current paper, the analysis  did not account for all participants of the research networks but explored only the diversity of the three key organisations --- of the research networks but explored only the diversity of the three key organisations in delivering innovations in FP projects. Similarly, Schwartz et al. (2012) explored the factors that drive innovation output from  subsidised R&D cooperation projects in Germany. Using patent applications and publica-tions as measures for the innovation output of the projects, the involvement of large firms  in the research consortium is strongly and positively associated with the number of patent  applications but not with the number of publications, while university involvement yields  the opposite results. In their exploration of diversity in FP projects, Coad et al. (2017) found negative rela- tionships between the level of organisational diversity, geographic diversity and diversity in terms of members’ shares of project cost. These findings suggest that the optimum amount  of diversity in one dimension depends on the amount of diversity in other dimensions. Hence, the authors argue that a high level of diversity in one dimension may not necessarily  be a liability as long as it can be compensated by sufficient similarity in another dimension.  While shedding new light on the interactions across various diversity dimensions in FP pro- jects, Coad et al. (2017) did not explore their effect on research projects’ performance. 3  Data sources and methodology 3.1  Innovation potential of research projects To investigate the relationship between the organisational and geographic diversity in EU- funded collaborative research projects and their innovation potential, we used information --- 366 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 from the Innovation Radar. The Innovation Radar (IR) is an EC support initiative that aims  to assess the potential of innovations developed within FP research projects and to identify  the bottlenecks to their commercialisation (De Prato et al. 2015). Data used to build the  innovation potential assessment framework of the Innovation Radar stem from a survey developed by DG CONNECT. The survey was conducted by external experts commis- sioned by DG CONNECT during periodic reviews of the research projects between Octo- ber 2014 and January 2016. The Innovation Radar monitors the ICT research actions and  the e-infrastructures activity under the seventh Framework Programme 2007-2013 (under  cooperation and capacities themes), the policy support actions carried out under the com-petitiveness and innovation framework policy support programme (CIP ICT PSP) and the  ICT-related projects in Horizon 2020 (EC 2014). The innovation potential assessment framework of the IR is extensively based on the  extant literature analysing the antecedents and success factors of new product performances and R&D projects (Rothwell 1992; Balachandra and Friar 1997; Heslop et al. 2001; Aste- bro 2004; Evanschitzky et al. 2012). The literature discussing success in innovations and  R&D projects is vast and lacks uniformity in the use of project outcome measures (Bal-achandra and Friar 1997; Cooper and Kleinschmidt 1997). According to Astebro (2004), project commercialisation is one of the most easily operationalized and replicable defini- tion across studies and is in this sense the most objective measure for a project’s outcome.  In the same vein, the Innovation Radar aims at providing a contingency framework and metrics measuring the project’s development towards commercialisation. However, in con- trast with this literature the innovation potential indicator does by no means intend to pro- vide a predictive signal of the innovation success, but rather aims to --- by no means intend to pro- vide a predictive signal of the innovation success, but rather aims to measure the progress that has been undertaken in developing and commercialising an innovation on the market. A large body of empirical studies has emerged over the past decades aiming at unravel- ling factors determining the technology development and commercialisation process (for  extended surveys see Montoya-Weiss and Calantone 1994; Griffin 1997; Galbraith et al.  2006). Within this empirical literature little convergence exists regarding the number, defi-nition and theoretical grounding for the key factors of effective technology commercialisa- tion (Astebro 2004). Despite the lack of agreement on the specific variables that are used  in the empirical analyses, there does, however, seem to be some consensus on the overall  classes or groups of these key factors. Based on a meta-analysis of 60 peer-reviewed pub- lications, Balachandra and Friar (1997) proposes four major categories on market, technol- ogy, environment, and organisational related characteristics. These categories have been  widely recognised and adopted by many scholars in the field of technology commercialisa- tion of R&D projects (Linton et al. 2002; Astebro 2004). Alternatively, Heslop et al. (2001) use factor analyses to group more than fifty variables related to the technology commer - cialisation process into four comprehensive dimensions of market readiness, technology readiness, commercial readiness, and management readiness. Taking stock of these considerations, the Innovation Radar framework is built along  the areas discussed in this stream of literature and incorporates them in the following dimensions: market potential, innovation readiness and innovation management (De Coster and Butler 2005; Liao and Witsil 2008). Each of these dimensions is discussed in  more detail below. Innovation readiness A successful launch of innovative products or services begins  with the identification of --- readiness A successful launch of innovative products or services begins  with the identification of technologies that are ready for commercialisation (Heslop  et al. 2001; Galbraith et al. 2006). In this respect, innovation readiness is closely related  to the notion of “technology readiness levels” (TRLs) which aim to provide a common  understanding of the status and development stage of new technologies (Mankins 2009). --- 367 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 Originally developed by the NASA in the mid-1970s, the use of TRLs rapidly increased  as they enable consistent and uniform assessments of technological maturity across dif- ferent types of technologies and disciplines. Being discipline-independent, they facili- tate more effective communications of the maturity of evolving innovations among diverse organisation types. Factors related to innovation readiness include, among oth- ers, the quality of the technology, age, scope, how pioneering it is, and expected time to  market. Innovation readiness aims to define the development phase of the innovation,  e.g. conceptualization, experimentation or commercialisation. It also takes into account  the steps that were taken in order to prepare innovations for commercialisation, e.g. prototyping, demonstration or testing activities or a feasibility study, and to secure the  necessary technological resources, e.g. skills, to bring the innovation to the market. In  addition, this criterion takes into account the development stage of an innovation and the time to its potential commercialisation. Innovation management This criterion addresses the issue of the project consor - tium and its commitment to bringing an innovation to the market. This is often seen as  the most important success indicator of a technology venture (Meseri and Maital 2001;  Kirchberger and Pohl 2016). In broad terms, it is related to the assessment and manage-ment of risks associated with innovation commercialisation. It involves measures such as  securing resources, organizing the process and setting milestones for technology trans- fer. This requires commitment from the top management (Nevens 1990; Davenport et al. 1998). Interactions with external actors, e.g. potential customers or users, also increase the  chances of successful commercialisation of technologies (Gerard et  al. 2002). Thus, the  concept of innovation management aims --- of technologies (Gerard et  al. 2002). Thus, the  concept of innovation management aims to capture how far the project’s development and/or management team are able to execute the necessary steps to transform an innovative  technology or research results into a marketable product and, finally, to prepare its com- mercialisation. These steps may include, for example, clarifying ownership and IPR issues,  preparing a business plan or market study, securing capital investment from public and/or  private sources, or engaging end-users in the project. Market potential A commercially viable innovation must demonstrate economic benefit.  The greater the benefit, the more desirable and marketable an innovation is. At the same time, the innovation commercialisation process involves acquiring ideas about existing or potential market needs and looking for solutions to satisfy them (Mitchell and Singh 1996).  The market potential criterion relates to the demand and supply side of an innovation. Regarding the demand side, it concerns the prospective size of the market for a product and  the chances of its successful commercialisation. It aims to assess how the product satis- fies a market sector and to indicate that there is a potential customer base. Market size and dynamics are among the most relevant factors behind a successful innovation commerciali- sation (Meseri and Maital 2001). With respect to the supply side, it aims to assess whether  there are potential barriers, e.g. regulatory frameworks or existing IPR issues, which could weaken the commercial exploitation of an innovation. In the current undertaking, the focus  is placed on the supply side. This is mostly because information on markets for individual  innovations is not available. In order to observe and measure the above-specified criteria, each of them was matched  with relevant questions in the Innovation Radar questionnaire. The outcome of the match-ing process is presented in more detail in prior studies on --- questionnaire. The outcome of the match-ing process is presented in more detail in prior studies on the IR (De Prato et al. 2015;  Pesole and Nepelski 2016). Composite sub-indicators for each assessment criterion were  created, i.e. Innovation Readiness Indicator (IRI), Innovation Management Indicator (IMI), and Market Potential Indicator (MPI). In the second step, the Innovation Potential Indicator --- 368 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 (IPI) was constructed. IPI is an arithmetic composite indicator which aggregates the values  of the three earlier sub-indicators.2 As mentioned above, the conceptual framework of the Innovation Radar builds on the  extant literature on success factors of innovations (see Evanschitzky et  al. 2012; Kirch- berger and Pohl 2016 for recent surveys). Evanschitzky et al. (2012) provide a meta-anal- ysis of papers published between 1999 and 2011 to assess the effects of factors predicting success of new product innovations and compares the magnitude of these effects found in  a previous meta-analysis study of Henard and Szymanski (2001). Both meta-analysis stud- ies show large divergences in the magnitude of success factors of new product innovations.  Due to a lack of convergence about the magnitude of success factors in the previous litera- ture, we follow a conservative approach and opt to equally weight the sub-indicators of the Innovation Potential Indicator. With this approach we follow the perspective of scholars  claiming that successful development and commercialisation of a new technology is a mat- ter of competence in all factors and of balance and coordination between them and not doing one or two things brilliantly well (Cooper and Kleinschmidt 1988; Rothwell 1992;  Conceição et al. 2012). Hence, equal weighting is applied to construct the Innovation Potential Indicator as  follows: Observed values of the IPI indicator are brought to a scale between 0 and 100 multiply - ing the IPI by a score of 10. The left-hand side indicator of Eq. (1) measures the innova- tion potential of each EU-funded research project and serves as dependent variable in the regression analyses of Sect. 5. 3.2  Organisational and geographic diversity To construct the focus explanatory variables which measure the organisational and geo-graphic diversity in EU-funded collaborative research projects, IR survey data was comple- mented with information on projects’ --- collaborative research projects, IR survey data was comple- mented with information on projects’ characteristics retrieved from the CORDIS database  (Mankins 2009). This database is the European Commission’s public repository of infor - mation on all EU-funded research projects and their results. For the purpose of this study,  we retrieved, among others, information on the type and location of project participants,  which allowed us to create measures of organisational and geographic diversity at project  level. The organisational and geographic diversity measures are calculated as inverse Her - findahl indices. The Herfindahl index is among the most accepted measures of diversity in  the economic literature (Patil and Taillie 1982; McDonald and Dimmick 2003). It has been  widely used in the context of innovation and R&D collaborations to measure geographic (Beers and Zand 2014), organisational (Talke et  al. 2011; Von Raesfeld et  al. 2012) or technological diversity (Baum et al. 2000; Van de Vrande 2013). Organisational and geo- graphic diversity—respectively denoted as D pORG and DpGEO—are calculated as follows:(1) IPI=1 3IRI+1 3IMI+1 3MPI 2 Internal consistency of the different items into their respective aggregated sub-indicators rests upon theo- retical groundings of the literature and correlation analyses among the various items in each sub-indicator.  These analyses reveal significant positive correlations across the various items, indicating that each item uniquely contributes to the measurement in the construct they are intended to measure, i.e. market potential, innovation readiness and innovation management. --- 369 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 Indices DpORG and DpGEO sums the squared shares of respectively organisation type o and  country c in FP project p and deducts it from unity. Hence, the higher the values of DpORG  and DpGEO, the more diverse the distributions of organisation types and countries in the  research networks. 3.3  Project characteristics We control for other types of characteristics that may affect the innovation potential of EU- funded research projects. First, we include the geographic distance between the different  partners of the research consortium. Using geographical latitude and longitude information  from the Geonames geographical database, we calculate - for each partner of the project - the distances between its city and the cities of its co-partners with the great-circle distance  method. The geographical distance in a research project is then defined as the average of all  these distance measures. Second, we include two dummy variables that control for the maturity of the project,  denoted as interim review and final review. Each of them takes the value of 1 if the project is reviewed for the second or third time respectively and 0 otherwise. The reference group  is the first review of a project. The maturity of the research project might influence its  innovation potential in several ways. Time is a salient factor in developing a fertile ground for knowledge dissemination, assimilation and understanding within the project network  (Schwartz et al. 2012). It requires frequent social interactions between the research part- ners, which are essentially based on trust and reciprocity (Dahl and Pedersen 2004; Nie- dergassel and Leker 2011). However, the development of trust and reciprocity takes con- siderable time and requires continuous efforts from all cooperating partners. Hence, as the duration of the cooperation advances, trust-based relationships between research partners  strengthen, which further --- advances, trust-based relationships between research partners  strengthen, which further reduces freeriding or opportunistic behaviour and increases the  project’s probability of innovative success (Morgan and Cooke 1998). Finally, we control for the amount of funding the project consortium received (project  funding) and for the total duration of the project (project duration). 4  Descriptive statistics Table  1 provides an overview of the sample of innovation projects and organisation types  that we have investigated in the current study. Between October 2014 and January 2016,  603 EU-funded collaborative research projects were reviewed using the Innovation Radar  questionnaire, including nearly 10% of all ICT FP7, CIP ICT PSP and Horizon2020 pro-jects. As a result, 1128 innovations were identified. This means that, on average, every  project produces nearly 2 innovations. The number of organisations active in these pro- jects amounted to 7193. We distinguished six types of organisations, including universi- ties, research centres, small –and medium-sized enterprises, large firms, governmental  institutions and others. Universities account for almost one third of the organisations, while research centres and the two types of firms have respective shares around 20%. The (2) DORG p=1−O/uni2211.s1 o=1(sop)2and DGEOp=1−C/uni2211.s1 c=1(scp)2 --- 370 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 percentage of both the governmental institutions and other types of organisations amounts  to 6% and 5% respectively. Further insights at the project level are presented in Table  2, highlighting the number of  organisations, organisation types and represented countries per project. On average, every project involves twelve organisations and includes four different organisation types, active  in six different countries. These descriptive statistics demonstrate the aim of EU-funded  research frameworks to create institutionally and internationally diverse research networks.  Most of the projects include three to four different organisation types (65%), while the  share of projects having five to six types amounts to 23%. Only eleven projects report that they have one organisation type active in the innovation development (only involving uni- versities). Concerning the geographical dispersion of research partners, projects include at  least two different countries, and can include as many as 30 countries. Table  3 presents summary statistics of the 603 EU-funded research projects. Research  projects diverge widely in their innovation potential. The project with the highest score obtained 88.33 points, while the lowest-ranked project got only 14.08 points. Substantial  differences can also be observed for organisational and geographic diversity measures. The  table provides further details about project characteristics, including geographical distance across all research partners, project duration, project funding and the review stage. The  correlation table between the variables is included in the Appendix.Table 1  Overview of innovation projects and organisation types Data source based on the Innovation Radar by DG Connect (Pesole and Nepelski 2016) and CordisReview period 10/2014 and 01/2016 Number of reviewed projects 603 Number of innovations 1128 Number of organisations 7193  Universities 30%  Research centers 19%  Small- and medium --- 1128 Number of organisations 7193  Universities 30%  Research centers 19%  Small- and medium sized enterprises 21%  Large firms 19%  Governmental institutions 6%  Others 5% Table 2  Organisational and geographic dispersion at project level Data source based on the Innovation Radar by DG Connect (Pesole and Nepelski 2016) and CordisIndicator (per project) Mean SD Min. Max. Number of organisations 12.01 8.17 3 96 Number of organisation types 3.82 1.13 1 6 Number of countries 5.89 3.13 2 30 --- 371 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 5  Empirical results We report the OLS estimations analysing the relationship between the organisational and  geographic diversity in EU-funded research projects and their innovation potential in  Table  4. The results reveal that organisational diversity in EU-funded research projects  has a positive effect on their innovation potential. In other words, research projects with a  greater heterogeneity of organisation partners have more innovation potential. In line with  previous studies, these findings point to the advantages of organisational diversity that may  arise through various means such as access to complementary assets (Teece 1986; Hage-doorn 1993), a wider range of capabilities and perspectives driven by a broader network of  relationships, and the promotion of knowledge diffusion (Ahuja 2000; Das and Teng 2000), among others. Though innovative outcomes of organisational collaborations may be nega-tively affected by the variety of institutional cultures, problems of distrust or differences in  objectives across organisations (Goerzen and Beamish 2005; Harryson et al. 2008; Pan- dza et al. 2011), the positive coefficient of the organisational diversity indicator suggests  that the beneficial effects of a wider diversity of organisation types outweigh the negative  impact of these challenges. The innovation potential of EU-funded research projects is negatively affected by geo- graphic diversity. This finding is consistent with the previous literature which points to  the challenges arising from collaborations with internationally-diverse partners. Research projects with a wider heterogeneity of international partners may encounter increased costs  of information transfer and face-to-face communications and difficulties due to language  differences (De Meyer 1993; Welch and Welch 2008). In column 2, we control for the geographical distance between the various organisations  of the research --- 2, we control for the geographical distance between the various organisations  of the research consortia. Contrary to our expectations, the geographical distance between partners has a positive impact on the innovation potential of research projects (Audretsch  and Feldman 1996; Asheim and Gertler 2005). This positive impact can be due to the  fact that we do not control for partner-specific characteristics (Branstetter and Sakakibara  2002). As such, the geographical distance indicator may capture the beneficial effects of  strong relational ties with more distant partners that possess the specialised knowledge needed for innovation development. In a similar context of strategic alliances, Capaldo and  Petruzzelli (2014) and Petruzzelli (2011) suggest that high geographical distance between Table 3  Descriptive statistics of EU-funded research projects Data source based on the Innovation Radar by DG Connect (Pesole and Nepelski 2016) and Cordis. Geo- graphical distance, project funding and project duration are expressed respectively in thousand kilometres, thousand euros and monthsVariables Obs Mean SD Min Max Innovation potential 603 49.21 14.08 14.17 88.33 Organisational diversity 603 0.62 0.14 0.00 0.79 Geographic diversity 603 0.75 0.08 0.45 0.96 Geographical distance 603 14.02 14.34 0.52 166.66 Final review 603 0.42 0.49 0.00 1.00 Interim review 603 0.34 0.48 0.00 1.00 Project funding 603 3587.43 2734.38 228.00 41,000.00 Project duration 603 37.94 6.52 16.00 67.00 --- 372 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 partners can provide the alliance with the heterogeneous knowledge resources needed for  successful innovation. Both control variables – final review and interim review – which account for the maturity  of the research project are positive and significant. As research projects in the first review serve as a reference group, these findings indicate that the innovation potential of research  projects increases during the project. Concerning the remaining features of the research pro- jects, the amount of funding has a positive impact on innovation potential while the project  duration seems to negatively affect its innovative outcome. The positive effect of the amount  of resources that is devoted to an FP project is in line with findings of Schwartz et al. (2012) that explored a sample of German subsidised R&D cooperative projects. As both the dependent variable and the variables of interest are expressed as logarithms,  estimated coefficients can be interpreted as elasticities. A doubling of the degree of organi-sational diversity would increase the innovation potential of a project by 7.5 percent. In  sharp contrast, a doubling of the degree of geographic diversity would lead to a nearly  20 percent decrease of a project’s innovation potential. The negative impact of geographic  diversity increases to roughly 30 percent after controlling for the geographical distance. These results highlight the importance of the project design and in particular the rela- tively high negative impact of a large geographic diversity within the research consortium.  Although results provide an indication of the magnitude and importance of the diversity impact, caution is required in interpreting the directionality of the effects. Given the cross- sectional nature of the data, we cannot ascertain causality and should merely interpret  results as associations.Table 4  Organisational and geographic diversity and innovation potential of EU-funded research --- 4  Organisational and geographic diversity and innovation potential of EU-funded research projects All models report OLS regression estimates. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses *Significant at 10%, **significant at 5%, ***significant at 1%Innovation potential Organisational diversity 0.075*** 0.068*** (0.019) (0.020) Geographic diversity − 0.199* − 0.326** (0.109) (0.135) Geographical distance 0.038* (0.020) Final review 0.271*** 0.270*** (0.029) (0.029) Interim review 0.088*** 0.088*** (0.032) (0.032) Project funding 0.092*** 0.082*** (0.025) (0.026) Project duration − 0.142* − 0.133* (0.079) (0.080) Constant 2.839*** 2.559*** (0.311) (0.370) Observations 603 603 F-statistic 21.69*** 18.48*** R-squared 0.173 0.178 --- 373 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 6  Conclusions Considering that the publically-funded research programmes produce technologies that  often form the basis for new products, services and markets, such instruments as the EC  Framework Programme improve the framework and systemic conditions of entrepreneurial  ecosystems. It accelerates the knowledge and technology production process and increases the stock of knowledge available to new technology-based firms. These firms are often the  vehicles for the commercialisation of new knowledge and technologies. The key element of  the EC FP is facilitating and exploiting the potential of diversified research networks. The level of diversity of EC FP is quite considerable. For example, during the  7 th Frame- work Programme, 25.000 projects out of more than 139.000 research proposals received  funding. Nearly 30.000 organisations participated to these projects. Universities and  research organisations accounted for over 71% of all participating organisations. Private companies, including SMEs, represented the second largest group (Fresco et al. 2015). The  Framework Programme by conception is a collaborative programme with global outreach  open to all researchers and research organisations irrespective of their country of origin.  FP7 has attained unprecedented levels of international participation by involving research- ers in retained proposals from as many as 170 countries from all continents (EC 2015). In this paper, we examined the impact of both organisational and geographic diversity  on the commercial potential of innovations developed by research networks funded by EU Framework Programmes. An extensive body of literature has analysed the advantages and drawbacks of organisational diversity in collaborative research and explored the various  challenges that can arise in collaborations with internationally-dispersed research part- ners. Not many studies have specifically assessed the --- with internationally-dispersed research part- ners. Not many studies have specifically assessed the effect of diversity in Framework Pro- grammes. These studies were more descriptive in nature (Pandza et  al. 2011) and often  assessed the beneficial effects on firms’ economic performance from engaging in these collaborative research projects (Bayona-Sáez and García-Marco 2010; Barajas et al. 2012;  Aguiar and Gagnepain 2017). However, none of these studies investigated how the design of the research consortium in terms of organisational and geographic diversity related to the commercial potential of innovations of EU-funded collaborative research projects. Using a sample of 603 EU-funded collaborative research projects with an ICT theme,  this paper provides evidence of the importance of the composition of innovation partner - ships in research collaborations. Our findings suggest that projects with a wider diversity  in research partners are more likely to deliver innovations with a greater potential. This  indicates that these projects reap the benefits of the various advantages associated with  more organisational diversity such as greater learning opportunities, enhanced creativity  and access to a broader network of knowledge sources and competences. Although wider organisational diversity generates difficulties in reconciling the different objectives and  time-frames of the various types of research partners, the net effect of a more institution- ally diverse research team seems to be positive. In contrast, research networks with greater geographic diversity are associated with lower  levels of innovation potential. This finding is in line with the literature which suggests that a larger heterogeneity of international partners in collaborative projects may increase the costs  of information transfer and face-to-face communications (De Meyer 1993; Welch and Welch  2008). Contrary to our expectations, the geographical distance between partners has a positive --- 2008). Contrary to our expectations, the geographical distance between partners has a positive impact on the innovation potential of research projects. This lets us assume that organisations  choose their partners based on their specialised knowledge assets and that the geographic dis- tance does not prevent them from engaging in collaboration. This conjecture can be confirmed once information on partner-specific scientific and technological capabilities is available. --- 374 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 The construction of such a large research programme as the EC FP represents a major  challenge. Our results show that besides such elements as the duration of funding of pro- jects, the composition of the teams participating to them plays an equally important role.  Just as there are decreasing returns to the number of participants (Breschi and Malerba 2011), there are limits to diversity of the participating organisations. Our results show, in  particular, that the geographical mix poses a challenge and can create tensions within the  project consortia, which can reduce their performance. Thus, such requirements as, for  example, in the H2020 programme to create consortia of organisations including at least 3  participants from 3 different EU Member States or Associated countries may not necessar - ily increase the productivity of project consortia (EC 2018). Our sample is restricted to the ICT theme of the FP. We have however to acknowledge  that various scientific and technological domains exhibit specific dynamics and configura-tions (Bonaccorsi 2008). In particular, emerging and high-growth fields in science, such as  computer science, biotechnology and life sciences, materials sciences and nanotechnology,  are characterized by theme-specific degrees of diversity and of complementarities, both at the  cognitive and institutional level, requiring active cooperation forms between different disci- plines and actors. In order to achieve efficient productive settings, these theme-specific char - acteristics need to be taken into account while constructing heterogeneous collaborations. In the context of the ICT or digital theme, one needs to consider the issue of participa- tion of early-stage ventures in collaborative projects or the process of creation of such ven-tures with the objective of commercialisation of the research results. Young, technology- based enterprises, including start-ups and spin-offs, are the main vehicles through --- S., & Malerba, F. (2011). Assessing the scientific and technological output of EU framework pro- grammes: Evidence from the FP6 projects in the ICT field. Scientometrics, 88(1), 239–257. Brett, J., Behfar, K., & Kern, M. C. (2006). Managing multicultural teams. Harvard Business Review,  84(11), 84–91. Caloghirou, Y., Ioannides, S., & Vonortas, N. S. (2003). Research joint ventures. Journal of Economic Sur - veys,  17(4), 541–570. Caloghirou, Y., Tsakanikas, A., & Vonortas, N. (2001). University-Industry Cooperation in the context of  the European framework programmes. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(1–2), 153–161. Caloghirou, Y., Vonortas, N. S., & Ioannides, S. (2004). European collaboration in research and develop- ment: Business strategy and public policy. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing. Capaldo, A., & Petruzzelli, A. M. (2014). Partner geographic and organizational proximity and the innova- tive performance of knowledge-creating alliances. European Management Review, 11(1), 63–84. Carayol, N. (2003). Objectives, agreements and matching in science–industry collaborations: reassembling  the pieces of the puzzle. Research Policy, 32(6), 887–908. Coad, A., Amoroso, S., & Grassano, N. (2017). Diversity in one dimension alongside greater similarity in  others: evidence from FP7 cooperative research teams. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 42(5),  1170–1183. Cohen, W. M., & Levinthal, D. A. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and innova- tion. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(1), 128–152. Conceição, O., Fontes, M., & Calapez, T. (2012). The commercialisation decisions of research-based spin- off: Targeting the market for technologies. Technovation, 32(1), 43–56. Cooper, R. G., & Kleinschmidt, E. J. (1988). Resource allocation in the new product process. Industrial  Marketing Management, 17(3), 249–262. Cooper, R. G., & Kleinschmidt, E. J. (1997). Winning businesses in product development: The critical suc- cess factors. The --- 377 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 De Meyer, A. (1993). Management of an international network of industrial R&D laboratories. R&D  Management, 23(2), 109–120. De Prato, G., Nepelski, D. & Piroli, G. (2015). Innovation Radar: Identifying innovations and innovators  with high potential in ICT FP7, CIP & H2020 Projects, Joint Research Centre, science for policy  report-EUR 27314 EN. https ://doi.org/10.2791/61591 . Di Cagno, D., Fabrizi, A., & Meliciani, V. (2014). The impact of participation in European joint research  projects on knowledge creation and economic growth. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 39(6),  836–858. Doz, Y. L., & Hamel, G. (1997). The use of alliances in implementing technology strategies. In M. L.  Tushman & P. Anderson (Eds.), Managing strategic innovation and change: A collection of read-ings (pp. 1–41). New York: Oxford University Press. Duysters, G., & Lokshin, B. (2011). Determinants of alliance portfolio complexity and its effect on inno- vative performance of companies. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 28(4), 570–585. EC. (2014). Horizon 2020 Work Programme 2014–2015: Leadership in enabling and industrial tech- nologies—information and communication technologies. Luxembourg: Office for Official Publica-tions of the European Communities. EC. (2015). Seventh FP7 monitoring report: Monitoring report 2013. Luxembourg: Publications Office  of the European Union. EC. (2016). Ex-Post Evaluation of the 7th EU framework programme (2007–2013). Luxembourg: Publi- cations Office of the European Union. EC. (2018). Participant Portal. H2020 Online Manual. http://ec.europ a.eu/resea rch/parti cipan ts/docs/ h2020 -fundi ng-guide /index _en.htm. Accessed 20 Mar 2018. Eisenhardt, K. M., & Schoonhoven, C. B. (1996). Resource-based view of strategic alliance formation:  Strategic and social effects in entrepreneurial firms. Organization Science, 7(2), 136–150. Ely, R. J., & Thomas, D. A. (2001). Cultural diversity
360 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 1 Introduction Framework and systemic conditions constitute key elements of entrepreneurial ecosystems  (Stam and Spigel 2016). Framework conditions include the institutions, physical conditions  or demand for new value, and systemic conditions contain, among others, networks, leader - ship, finance, talent or new knowledge. Whereas the role of the public sector in creating  entrepreneurship-friendly framework conditions is relatively well understood (Fuerlinger  et al. 2015; Van Roy and Nepelski 2016, 2017), its impact on systemic conditions is less  clear. The most obvious is the function of public funding. In Europe, for example, various instruments of funding exist to improve the process of knowledge creation and innovation at  all stages of technology development and commercialisation (Gampfer et al. 2016). Many  young companies benefit from early-stage financing and state-sponsored technologies,  which often form the basis for their new products and services (Mazzucato 2013). Through  a high-level investment in risky and new technology projects, the public sector helps to cre-ate the markets of the future. In this context, the European Commission’s (EC) Framework  Programmes (FPs) have a long history of public support of the innovation and entrepreneur - ship ecosystems. But the objectives of the FPs go far beyond providing funding to tech-nology development. They also aim at improving the systemic conditions of the innovation  and entrepreneurship ecosystems by facilitating the creation of research networks between different organisations. In creating and exploiting diversified research networks, FPs are  expected to trigger technological and economic transformation (Audretsch and Link 2016;  EC 2016; Leyden 2016; Link 2016). One of the underlying assumptions behind the design  of the FPs is that network diversity is a positive factor. It is expected to increase the level of  innovation and to facilitate discovery of cross-border --- their immediate survival and growth (Miles et al. 1999; Baum et al. 2000). Large firms appeared much less inclined to commercialise right out of the project than  SMEs which are highly committed to commercialisation. Because of the more marginal --- 364 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 role of FP projects, larger companies reported weaker strategic alignment and less explicit  goals. For them, participation in research collaborations means technology watch, acquisi- tion of new knowledge and building partnerships (Hernán et al. 2003). Universities and public research centres, on the other hand, participate in research  collaborations in order to acquire complementary resources that allow them to advance research (Caloghirou et al. 2001; Polt et al. 2008). Based on their scientific capabilities,  universities engage in research collaborations for their research contents (Carayol 2003).  The main criterion for collaboration is that this content feeds a university’s own research  agenda. Commercialisation is not the main objective, but rather the building up of new knowledge and technology and the investigation of new research areas. Overall, industry players tend to engage in research collaborations from a knowledge  exploitation strategy which is characterised by a short- and medium-term horizon. Pub-lic research institutions, on the other hand, follow a knowledge exploration strategy which  tends to have a long-term perspective (Hansen 1999). A wider diversity of organisation  types in FP projects provides a variety of roles, competences and expectations through the  different phases of the research projects. Hence, collaborations between industry and pub- lic institutions may create beneficial complementary effects, but they can at the same time be potential sources of conflict (Pandza et al. 2011). 2.2  Geographic diversity and geographical proximity A great international heterogeneity of partners in a research collaboration implies advan-tages but also challenges in collaborating with partners located in different countries. The  literature highlights the benefits of geographic diversity in gaining access to highly sophis- ticated, specialised and tacit knowledge from various local sources (Meyer-Krahmer and Reger --- technology- based enterprises, including start-ups and spin-offs, are the main vehicles through which  new knowledge from science and engineering is converted into economic benefits (Acs et al. 2009a; b). These companies are more likely than others to pursue opportunities asso- ciated with radical innovations that produce positive knowledge externalities and may have transformative consequences for the entire society (Baumol et al. 2007). This is particularly  true for ICT sector companies and digitally-enabled companies. By increasing the level of  participation of early-stage ventures in FP projects, the EC could accelerate the knowledge and technology production and commercialisation process. Our research was subject to a number of limitations, which may also suggest directions  for future research. First, we lacked information about the level of technological relatedness across industry partners within research networks, which had been reported in prior studies  as a relevant factor for the outcome of collaborations (Branstetter and Sakakibara 2002).  A greater degree of technological proximity between firms could facilitate the exchange,  the assimilation and the use of knowledge within the research consortium. If technological  divergence between the partners is large, an industry partner’s knowledge would be largely unexploitable for its counterparts. Hence, an interesting future research project would be to  construct a technological proximity measure based on patent information of the industry  partners. Second, linking industry partners to third-party databases would also allow us to control for the quality of firms active in the research project, including measures of firm  size, value added and productivity growth. Information on the use of VC funding by organ- isations participating to the EU-funded research projects would improve our understanding of the position and role of publically-funded research programmes within the entrepreneur - ial --- of the position and role of publically-funded research programmes within the entrepreneur - ial ecosystems. It would cast light on the interplay between public and private sources of funding and the access to funding at each stage of technology development and commer - cialisation (Auerswald and Branscomb 2003). Third, the innovation potential of EU-funded research projects may also depend on the quality of other types of research partners. This calls for the inclusion of quality measures of universities, public research centres and gov - ernmental institutions in the estimation analyses. --- 375 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Interna- tional License (http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen ses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,  and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. Appendix See Table 5. References Acs, Z. J., Audretsch, D. B., & Strom, R. J. (2009a). Entrepreneurship, growth, and public policy. Cam- bridge: Cambridge University Press. Acs, Z. J., Braunerhjelm, P., Audretsch, D. B., & Carlsson, B. (2009b). The knowledge spillover theory of  entrepreneurship. Small Business Economics, 32(1), 15–30. Aguiar, L., & Gagnepain, P. (2017). European cooperative R&D and firm performance: Evidence based on  funding differences in key actions. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 53, 1–31. Ahonen, P., & Tienari, J. (2009). United in diversity? Disciplinary normalization in an EU project. Organi- zation, 16(5), 655–679. Ahuja, G. (2000). The duality of collaboration: inducements and opportunities in the formation of interfirm  linkages. Strategic Management Journal, 21(3), 317–343. Ahuja, G., & Lampert, M. C. (2001). Entrepreneurship in the large corporation: a longitudinal study of how  established firms create breakthrough inventions. Strategic Management Journal, 22(6–7), 521–543. Anselin, L., Varga, A., & Acs, Z. (1997). Local geographic spillovers between university research and high  technology innovations. Journal of Urban Economics, 42(3), 422–448. Archibugi, D., & Coco, A. (2004). International partnerships for knowledge in business and academia: A  comparison between Europe and the USA. Technovation, 24(7), 517–528. Aristei, D., Vecchi, M., & Venturini, F. (2016). University and inter-firm R&D collaborations: propensity  and intensity of --- & Venturini, F. (2016). University and inter-firm R&D collaborations: propensity  and intensity of cooperation in Europe. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 41(4), 841–871. Arrow, K. (1962). Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention. In NBER (Ed.), The rate  and direction of inventive activity: Economic and social factors (pp. 609–626). Princeton: Princeton University Press. Asheim, B., & Gertler, M. (2005). Regional innovation systems and the geographical foundations of inno- vation. In J. Fagerberg, D. Mowery, & R. R. Nelson (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of innovation (pp. 291–317). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Astebro, T. (2004). Key success factors for technological entrepreneurs R&D projects. IEEE Transactions  on Engineering Management, 51(3), 381–399. Audretsch, D. B., & Feldman, M. P. (1996). R&D spillovers and the geography of innovation and produc- tion. The American Economic Review, 86(3), 630–640.Table 5  Correlation table Variables (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (1) Innovation potential 1.000 (2) Organisational diversity 0.173 1.000 (3) Geographic diversity 0.007 0.153 1.000 (4) Geographical distance 0.110 0.252 0.582 1.000 (5) Final review 0.337 0.038 0.053 0.027 1.000 (6) Interim review − 0.106 0.012 − 0.035 0.010 − 0.611 1.000 (7) Project funding 0.119 0.107 0.274 0.322 − 0.065 0.165 1.000 (8) Project duration 0.021 − 0.052 0.106 0.106 − 0.016 0.163 0.570 1.000 --- 376 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 Audretsch, D. B., & Link, A. N. (2016). Essays in public sector entrepreneurship. Cham: Springer. Auerswald, P., & Branscomb, L. (2003). Valleys of death and Darwinian seas: financing the invention to  innovation transition in the United States. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 28(3), 227–239. Balachandra, R., & Friar, J. H. (1997). Factors for success in R&D projects and new product innovation: a  contextual framework. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 44(3), 276–287. Barajas, A., Huergo, E., & Moreno, L. (2012). Measuring the economic impact of research joint ventures  supported by the EU framework programme. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 37(6), 917–942. Baum, J. A. C., Calabrese, T., & Silverman, B. S. (2000). Don’t go it alone: alliance network composi- tion and startups’ performance in Canadian biotechnology. Strategic Management Journal, 21(3),  267–294. Baumol, W. J., Litan, R. E., & Schramm, C. J. (2007). Good capitalism, bad capitalism, and the economics  of growth and prosperity. New Haven: Yale University Press. Bayona-Sáez, C., & García-Marco, T. (2010). Assessing the effectiveness of the Eureka program. Research  Policy, 39(10), 1375–1386. Beers, C., & Zand, F. (2014). R&D cooperation, partner diversity, and innovation performance: an empirical  analysis. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 31(2), 292–312. Belderbos, R., Carree, M., & Lokshin, B. (2004). Cooperative R&D and firm performance. Research Policy,  33(10), 1477–1492. Bonaccorsi, A. (2008). Search regimes and the industrial dynamics of science. Minerva, 46(3), 285.Boschma, R. (2005). Proximity and innovation: a critical assessment. Regional Studies, 39(1), 61–74.Branstetter, L. G., & Sakakibara, M. (2002). When do research consortia work well and why? Evidence  from Japanese panel data. The American Economic Review, 92(1), 143–159. Breschi, S., & Malerba, F. (2011). Assessing the scientific and technological output of EU framework pro- --- E. J. (1997). Winning businesses in product development: The critical suc- cess factors. The Journal of Product Innovation Management, 14(2), 132. Cox, T. (1993). Cultural diversity in organizations: Theory, research and practice. San Francisco, CA:  Barrett-Koehler. Cox, T. H., & Blake, S. (1991). Managing cultural diversity: Implications for organizational competi- tiveness. The Executive, 5(3), 45–56. Dahl, M. S., & Pedersen, C. Ø. (2004). Knowledge flows through informal contacts in industrial clusters:  Myth or reality? Research Policy, 33(10), 1673–1686. Das, T. K., & Teng, B.-S. (2000). A resource-based theory of strategic alliances. Journal of Manage- ment, 26(1), 31–61. Davenport, S., Davies, J., & Grimes, C. (1998). Collaborative research programmes: Building trust from  difference. Technovation, 19(1), 31–40. De Coster, R., & Butler, C. (2005). Assessment of proposals for new technology ventures in the UK:  Characteristics of university spin-off companies. Technovation, 25(5), 535–543. --- firms. Organization Science, 7(2), 136–150. Ely, R. J., & Thomas, D. A. (2001). Cultural diversity at work: The effects of diversity perspectives on  work group processes and outcomes. Administrative Science Quarterly, 46(2), 229–273. Evanschitzky, H., Eisend, M., Calantone, R. J., & Jiang, Y. (2012). Success factors of product innova- tion: An updated meta-analysis. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 29(S1), 21–37. Faems, D., Van Looy, B., & Debackere, K. (2005). Interorganizational collaboration and innovation:  toward a portfolio approach. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 22(3), 238–250. Freeman, C. (1991). Networks of innovators: A synthesis of research issues. Research Policy, 20(5),  499–514. Fresco, L., Martinuzzi, A., Butkus, E., Cosnard, M., Hallen, A., Harayama, Y., Herlitschka, S., Kuhl- mann, S., Nedeltcheva, V., Pelly, R., Anvret, M. & Bustelo, M. (2015). Commitment and coher - ence. Ex-post-evaluation of the 7th EU framework programme (2007–2013). Fuerlinger, G., Fandl, U., & Funke, T. (2015). The role of the state in the entrepreneurship ecosystem:  Insights from Germany. Triple Helix, 2–3(1), 1–26. Galbraith, C. S., Ehrlich, S. B., & DeNoble, A. F. (2006). Predicting technology success: Identifying key  predictors and assessing expert evaluation for advanced technologies. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 31(6), 673–684. Gampfer, R., Mitchell, J., Stamenov, B., Zifciakova, J. & Jonkers, K. (2016). Improving access to  finance: which schemes best support the emergence of high-growth innovative enterprises? A mapping, analysis and assessment of finance instruments in selected EU Member States, Joint Research Centre, science for policy report-EUR 28084 EN. https ://doi.org/10.2791/63575 7. Gerard, G., Shaker, Z., & Robley, W. (2002). The effects of business—university alliances on innovative  output and financial performance: A study of publicly traded biotechnology companies. Journal of  Business Venturing, 17(6), 577–609. Goerzen, --- publicly traded biotechnology companies. Journal of  Business Venturing, 17(6), 577–609. Goerzen, A., & Beamish, P. W. (2005). The effect of alliance network diversity on multinational enterprise  performance. Strategic Management Journal, 26(4), 333–354. Griffin, A. (1997). Modeling and measuring product development cycle time across industries. Journal of  Engineering and Technology Management, 14(1), 1–24. Gulati, R. (1999). Network location and learning: The influence of network resources and firm capabilities  on alliance formation. Strategic Management Journal, 20(5), 397–420. Hagedoorn, J. (1993). Understanding the rationale of strategic technology partnering: Nterorganizational  modes of cooperation and sectoral differences. Strategic Management Journal, 14(5), 371–385. Hagedoorn, J., & Kranenburg, H. (2003). Growth patterns in R&D partnerships: An exploratory statistical  study. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 21(4), 517–531. Hagedoorn, J., Link, A., & Vonortas, N. (2000). Research partnerships. Research Policy, 29(4–5), 567–586.Hansen, M. T. (1999). The search-transfer problem: The role of weak ties in sharing knowledge across  organization subunits. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(1), 82–111. --- 378 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 Harryson, S., Kliknaite, S., & Dudkowski, R. (2008). Flexibility in innovation through external learning:  exploring two models for enhanced industry? University collaboration. International Journal of Tech- nology Management, 41(1–2), 109–137. Henard, D. H., & Szymanski, D. M. (2001). Why some new products are more successful than others. Jour - nal of Marketing Research, 38(3), 362–375. Hennart, J.-F., & Zeng, M. (2002). Cross-cultural differences and joint venture longevity. Journal of Inter - national Business Studies, 33(4), 699–716. Hernán, R., Marín, P. L., & Siotis, G. (2003). An empirical evaluation of the determinants of Research Joint  Venture Formation. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 51(1), 75–89. Heslop, L. A., McGregor, E., & Griffith, M. (2001). Development of a technology readiness assessment  measure: The cloverleaf model of technology transfer. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(4),  369–384. Hoegl, M., & Proserpio, L. (2004). Team member proximity and teamwork in innovative projects. Research  Policy, 33(8), 1153–1165. Jaffe, A. B., Trajtenberg, M., & Henderson, R. (1993). Geographic localization of knowledge spillovers as  evidenced by patent citations. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(3), 577–598. Keller, R. T. (1986). Predictors of the performance of project groups in R&D organizations. Academy of  Management Journal, 29(4), 715–726. Kirchberger, M. A., & Pohl, L. (2016). Technology commercialization: A literature review of success fac- tors and antecedents across different contexts. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 41(5), 1077–1112. Kogut, B. (1988). Joint ventures: Theoretical and empirical perspectives. Strategic Management Journal,  9(4), 319–332. Laursen, K., & Salter, A. (2006). Open for innovation: the role of openness in explaining innovation perfor - mance among UK manufacturing firms. Strategic Management Journal, 27(2), 131–150. Lavie, D., & Miller, S. R. (2008). Alliance portfolio --- Strategic Management Journal, 27(2), 131–150. Lavie, D., & Miller, S. R. (2008). Alliance portfolio internationalization and firm performance. Organiza- tion Science, 19(4), 623–646. Lehmann, E. E., & Menter, M. (2016). University–industry collaboration and regional wealth. The Journal  of Technology Transfer, 41(6), 1284–1307. Lerner, J., & Merges, R. P. (1998). The control of technology alliances: An empirical analysis of the bio- technology industry. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 46(2), 125–156. Leyden, D. (2016). Public-sector entrepreneurship and the creation of a sustainable innovative economy.  Small Business Economics, 46(4), 553–564. Liao, P., & Witsil, A. (2008). A practical guide to opportunity assessment methods. New-York: Research  Triangle Park, RTI Press. Link, A. N. (2016). Public sector entrepreneurship: Introduction to the special section. Economia e Politica  Industriale, 43(4), 355–356. Linton, J. D., Walsh, S. T., & Morabito, J. (2002). Analysis, ranking and selection of R&D projects in a  portfolio. R&D Management, 32(2), 139–148. Luukkonen, T. (1998). The difficulties in assessing the impact of EU framework programmes. Research  Policy, 27(6), 599–610. Luukkonen, T. (2000). Additionality of EU framework programmes1. Research Policy, 29(6), 711–724. Mankins, J. (2009). Technology readiness assessments: A retrospective. Acta Astronautica, 65(9–10),  1216–1223. Mazzucato, M. (2013). The entrepreneurial state: debunking public vs. private sector myths. London:  Anthem Press. Mazzucato, M. (2016). From market fixing to market-creating: A new framework for innovation policy.  Industry and Innovation, 23(2), 140–156. McDonald, D. G., & Dimmick, J. (2003). The conceptualization and measurement of diversity. Communica- tion Research, 30(1), 60–79. Meseri, O., & Maital, S. (2001). A survey analysis of university-technology transfer in Israel: Evaluation of  projects and determinants of success. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(1), 115–125. --- of  projects and determinants of success. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(1), 115–125. Meyer-Krahmer, F., & Reger, G. (1999). New perspectives on the innovation strategies of multinational  enterprises: Lessons for technology policy in Europe. Research Policy, 28(7), 751–776. Miles, G., Preece, S. B., & Baetz, M. C. (1999). Dangers of dependence: The impact of strategic alliance  use by small technology-based firms. Journal of Small Business Management, 37(2), 20. Mitchell, W., & Singh, K. (1996). Survival of businesses using collaborative relationships to commercialize  complex goods. Strategic Management Journal, 17(3), 169–196. Montoya-Weiss, M. M., & Calantone, R. (1994). Determinants of new product performance: A review and  meta-analysis. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 11(5), 397–417. --- 379 The organisational and geographic diversity and innovation… 1 3 Mora-Valentin, E. M., Montoro-Sanchez, A., & Guerras-Martin, L. A. (2004). Determining factors in the  success of R&D cooperative agreements between firms and research organizations. Research Policy,  33(1), 17–40. Morgan, K., & Cooke, P. (1998). The associational economy: Firms, regions, and innovation. New-York:  Oxford University Press. Nelson, R. R. (1959). The simple economics of basic scientific research. Journal of Political Economy,  67(3), 297–306. Nepelski, D., & Piroli, G. (2018). Organizational diversity and innovation potential of EU-funded research  projects. Journal of Technology Transfer, 43(3), 615–639. Nevens, M. (1990). Commercializing technology: What the best companies do. Planning Review, 18(6),  20–24. Niedergassel, B., & Leker, J. (2011). Different dimensions of knowledge in cooperative R&D projects of  university scientists. Technovation, 31(4), 142–150. Oxley, J. E. (1997). Appropriability hazards and governance in strategic alliances: A transaction cost  approach. Journal of Law Economics and Organization, 13(2), 387–409. Pandza, K., Wilkins, T., & Alfoldi, E. (2011). Collaborative diversity in a nanotechnology innovation sys- tem: Evidence from the EU framework programme. Technovation, 31(9), 476–489. Patil, G., & Taillie, C. (1982). Diversity as a concept and its measurement. Journal of the American Statisti- cal Association, 77(379), 548–561. Pavitt, K. (2005). Innovation processes. In J. Fagerberg, D. Mowery, & R. Nelson (Eds.), The Oxford hand- book of innovation (pp. 86–114). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Pesole, A. & Nepelski, D. (2016). Universities and collaborative innovation in EC-funded research projects:  An analysis based on innovation radar data, Joint Research Centre, science for policy report-EUR 28355 EN. https ://doi.org/10.2791/24494 9. Petruzzelli, A. M. (2011). The impact of technological relatedness, prior ties, and geographical distance on --- A. M. (2011). The impact of technological relatedness, prior ties, and geographical distance on  university–industry collaborations: A joint-patent analysis. Technovation, 31(7), 309–319. Pisano, G. P. (1990). The R&D boundaries of the firm: an empirical analysis. Administrative Science Quar - terly,  35(1), 153–176. Polt, W., Vonortas, N., & Fisher, R. (2008). The impact of publicly funded research on innovation: An  analysis of European framework programmes for research and development. Brussels: European Commission. Powell, W. W., & Brantley, P. (1992). Competitive cooperation in biotechnology: Learning through net- works. In N. Nohria & R. Eccles (Eds.), Networks and organizations: Structure, form and action (pp. 366–394). Boston: Harvard Business School Press. Powell, W. W., Koput, K. W., & Smith-Doerr, L. (1996). Interorganizational collaboration and the locus of  innovation: Networks of learning in biotechnology. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41(1), 116–145. Protogerou, A., Caloghirou, Y., & Siokas, E. (2013). Twenty-five years of science–industry collaboration:  the emergence and evolution of policy-driven research networks across Europe. The Journal of Tech-nology Transfer, 38(6), 873–895. Röller, L.-H., Siebert, R., & Tombak, M. (2007). Why firms form (or do not form) RJVs. The Economic  Journal, 117(522), 1122–1144. Rothwell, R. (1992). Successful industrial innovation: Critical factors for the 1990s. R&D Management,  22(3), 221–240. Schwartz, M., Peglow, F., Fritsch, M., & Günther, J. (2012). What drives innovation output from subsidized  R&D cooperation?—Project-level evidence from Germany. Technovation, 32(6), 358–369. Stahl, G. K., Maznevski, M. L., Voigt, A., & Jonsen, K. (2010). Unraveling the effects of cultural diversity  in teams: A meta-analysis of research on multicultural work groups. Journal of International Business Studies, 41(4), 690–709. Stam, E. & Spigel, B. (2016). Entrepreneurial ecosystems, Utrecht School of Economics. Discussion --- Stam, E. & Spigel, B. (2016). Entrepreneurial ecosystems, Utrecht School of Economics. Discussion paper  series nr: 16–13. Talke, K., Salomo, S., & Kock, A. (2011). Top management team diversity and strategic innovation orien- tation: The relationship and consequences for innovativeness and performance. Journal of Product  Innovation Management, 28(6), 819–832. Teece, D. J. (1986). Profiting from technological innovation: Implications for integration, collaboration,  licensing and public policy. Research Policy, 15(6), 285–305. Van de Vrande, V. (2013). Balancing your technology-sourcing portfolio: How sourcing mode diversity  enhances innovative performance. Strategic Management Journal, 34(5), 610–621. Van Roy, V. & Nepelski, D. (2016). Assessment of framework conditions for the creation and growth of  firms in Europe, Joint Research Centre, science for policy report–EUR 28167 EN. https ://doi.org/10.2791/2811. --- 380 D. Nepelski et al. 1 3 Van Roy, V. & Nepelski, D. (2017). Determinants of high-tech entrepreneurship in Europe, Joint Research  Centre, science for policy report–EUR 28299 EN. https ://doi.org/10.2791/96153 . Von Raesfeld, A., Geurts, P., Jansen, M., Boshuizen, J., & Luttge, R. (2012). Influence of partner diver - sity on collaborative public R&D project outcomes: A study of application and commercialization of  nanotechnologies in the Netherlands. Technovation, 32(3), 227–233. Welch, D. E., & Welch, L. S. (2008). The importance of language in international knowledge transfer. Man- agement International Review, 48(3), 339–360. Zucker, L. G. (1986). Production of trust: Institutional sources of economic structure, 1840–1920. Research  in Organizational Behavior, 8, 53–111.
El estudio resalta la importancia de la diversidad organizativa en proyectos de investigación financiados por la UE, mostrando que los proyectos con una amplia gama de tipos de organizaciones tienen un mayor potencial de innovación. Sin embargo, se encontró que la diversidad geográfica tiene un impacto negativo en el potencial de innovación, posiblemente debido a dificultades de coordinación y comunicación. Además, se enfatiza la importancia de la madurez del proyecto, el financiamiento y la duración en la influencia del potencial de innovación. Los hallazgos sugieren que si bien la diversidad en las asociaciones de investigación puede ser beneficiosa, es crucial considerar cuidadosamente la composición del consorcio de investigación para maximizar el potencial de innovación en proyectos financiados por la UE.

El texto también discute las condiciones marco y sistémicas en los ecosistemas empresariales, destacando que las condiciones marco incluyen instituciones, condiciones físicas y demanda de nuevo valor, mientras que las condiciones sistémicas contienen redes, liderazgo, financiamiento, talento y nuevo conocimiento. Se menciona que si bien se entiende bien el papel del sector público en la creación de condiciones marco favorables para el emprendimiento, su impacto en las condiciones sistémicas es menos claro.

Se resalta la importancia del financiamiento público, como los programas de la Comisión Europea, en la creación de mercados futuros a través de la inversión en proyectos tecnológicos arriesgados. Se menciona que las colaboraciones en proyectos de investigación entre empresas, universidades y centros de investigación públicos pueden tener efectos beneficiosos, pero también pueden generar conflictos.

Además, se discute la diversidad geográfica en las colaboraciones de investigación, señalando que la heterogeneidad internacional de los socios puede tener ventajas y desafíos. Se destaca el papel de las empresas basadas en tecnología en la conversión del conocimiento científico en beneficios económicos, especialmente en sectores como la tecnología de la información y la comunicación.

El texto también menciona limitaciones en la investigación, como la falta de información sobre la proximidad tecnológica entre socios de la industria en redes de investigación, y sugiere posibles direcciones para investigaciones futuras, como la construcción de medidas de proximidad tecnológica basadas en información de patentes.

En resumen, el texto aborda la importancia de las condiciones marco y sistémicas en los ecosistemas empresariales, el papel del financiamiento público en la innovación, la diversidad en las colaboraciones de investigación y las limitaciones y posibles áreas de investigación futura.
