Family-Driven Innovation: RESOLVING THE PARADOX IN FAMILY FIRMS Alfredo De Massis Alberto Di Minin Federico Frattini This article presents an integrated, contingency perspective on family firm innovation called Family-Driven Inno- vation (FDI). The framework highlights the need for consistency between a family firm ’s strategic innovation decisions and its idiosyncrasies to achieve and sustain competitive advantage through innovation. This article also offers some directions for future research on FDI and serves as an introduction to this special section onfamily firms. (Keywords: Innovation, Innovation Management, Family Firms) Family firms are the most ubiquitous form of business organization globally,1and the enduring influence of families on business and soci- ety is an essential part of any world economy.2In the USA, one-third of the S&P 500 firms are either controlled or owned by the founding family,3and family firms account for 80-90% of private sector firms, generate 63% of national GDP, and employ 57% of the total workforce.4In Europe, the importance of family firms is even greater.5Family firms also significantly contrib- ute to the growth of economies in South and East Asia, Latin America, and theMiddle East, 6and recent empirical research has shown how the proportion of firms under family control significantly affects economic growth.7Thus, scholars and practitioners are paying increasing attention to understanding the distinctive behavior of this form of business organization. Decades of research on innovation on family firms have produced mixed results. Innovation is a vital source of competitive advantage8and an important determinant of superior performance.9However, family firm innovation is often characterized by a dual nature. On the one hand, family firms are conventionallyseen as conservative, path-dependent, and ultimately less innovative than other types of organizations. 10On the other hand, statistics show that family owners con- trol more
types of organizations. 10On the other hand, statistics show that family owners con- trol more than 50% of Europe ’s most innovative firms.11Consider, for example, the Mittelstand family firms in Germany, which are internationally renowned for their CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU 5
capacity to successfully focus on innovation in order to stay ahead of potential competitors in their tech- nological niche market.12Family-owned companies such as Beretta, Miquel y Costas Group, Pollet, andVan Eeghen are well known for often being the firstto embrace impactful innovations in their respective industries. Recent scholarly work has suggested that innovation in the context of family firms is charac-terized by a paradox, which is manifested by family firms innovating less despite having the ability to innovate more than their non-family counterparts. 13 This in turn has led to two key questions that bothscholars and practitioners have recently attempted to address. How can family owners and managers resolve this paradox and thereby unlock the inno- vation potential of their organizations? More gener- ally, how can they resolve this paradox and build competitive advantage through innovation? This article serves to introduce the California Management Review special sec- tion on innovation in family firms. It also contributes to the current debate onfamily firm innovation by suggesting an integrated and contingency perspective 14 and by proposing a model of competitive advantage through innovation in familyfirms. More specifically, it introduces the concept of Family-Driven Innovation (FDI), the internally consistent set of strategic decisions that allow a family firm to resolve the innovation paradox by ensuring a close fit between these decisions and the idiosyncratic characteristics of the family firm. Three contingency factors describe the characteristics of family firms and capture their heterogeneity. They are the where ,how, and what of family firms that capture, respectively, the direc- tion where the family firm wants to go (as expressed by the family owners ’goals and intentions, i.e., their “willingness ”to behave), the discretion the family firm has to move in that direction (which is a function of the structures, governance mech-anisms, and
has to move in that direction (which is a function of the structures, governance mech-anisms, and decision-making processes that constrain the power of family owners,i.e., what we call “ability as discretion ”), and the resources and capabilities that are needed or should be used for family owners to lead the firm toward that direc-tion (what we call “ability as resources ”). Similarly, strategic decisions in innova- tion can be mapped along the same where ,how,a n d what contingency factors, which means deciding where the firm will find the knowledge resources it needs to innovate (e.g., within its existing knowledge base, in new knowledge domains, or searching over time), how the innovation process is managed (e.g., whether the firm follows an open or closed approach to innovation), and what the firm wants to innovate (e.g., whether it will prioritize products/services, processes, or business model innovation and whether more emphasis will be given to radical or incremental innovation). While extant innovation research has investigated an abundance of firm- level drivers of innovation, 15the role of family involvement has only scarcelyAlfredo De Massis is Full Professor of Entrepreneurship & Family Business atLancaster University Management School and Director of the School ’s Centre for Family Business. He serves on the Editorial Boards of ET&P, FBR, SEJ, JFBS, and asChair of the Family Business Research SIG at the European Academy of Management. <a.demassis@lancaster.ac.uk> Alberto Di Minin is Associate Professor at the Institute of Management of the ScuolaSuperiore Sant’ Anna, and Research Fellow with the Berkeley Roundtable on the International Economy. He serves on the Editorial Board of CIM. <a.diminin@sssup.it> Federico Frattini is Associate Professor at the School of Management of Politecnico di Milano and Director of the MBA &EMBA Division of MIP, the Graduate School of Business of Politecnico di Milano. He serves on the Editorial Board ofEJIM.
the Graduate School of Business of Politecnico di Milano. He serves on the Editorial Board ofEJIM. <federico.frattini@polimi.it>Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms 6 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU
been understood so far.16Incorporating the role of family involvement and its effects in innovation studies is important for general management scholars, if they aim to advance knowledge on the most ubiquitous form of business organization worldwide. Readers of this special section will find that the authors of the published articles have considered constructs such as: readiness to innovation, socio-emotionalwealth, core assets and liabilities, external turbulence, and business model evolution as drivers that explain conflicting findings on innovation in family firms. Indeed,scholars have studied the effect of family involvement on a number of aspects of innovation —including R&D investments, 17discontinuous technology adoption,18 and external technology acquisition19—and have examined this effect in light of specific characteristics of family firms such as goals, governance, or resources, depending on the theoretical perspective adopted in each study. Our concept of FDI provides a framework to advance the theory and practice of innovation in family firms. In other words, we argue here that scholars and practitioners need an inte- grated reconceptualization of family involvement and innovation, rather than just examining selected aspects of innovation in family firms and drawing reckless con- clusions based on a narrow set of information. Paradoxical Effects of Family Involvement on Innovation The vast research on innovation has thus far focused on firms where own- ership and management are separate, without explicitly taking into account whathappens when they are combined. 20Unification of ownership and control is typi- cal of family firms, and this endows family firms with distinctive incentives, authority structures, accountability norms, resources, and capabilities.21These characteristics have an impact on how innovation takes place in family firms,and a growing body of research is providing evidence that innovation in family firms is different than in their
body of research is providing evidence that innovation in family firms is different than in their non-family counterparts. 22 Existing research on this topic is nevertheless limited and has focused so far on the effect of family involvement on innovation inputs, activities, and outputs.The key findings are: §Innovation inputs: Existing research is largely consistent in indicating that family firms generally invest less money in R&D compared to their non- family counterparts. 23 §Innovation activities: There are preliminary results suggesting that innova-tion activities are handled differently in family vs. non-family firms, but this area needs much more theoretical and empirical research effort to becompletely developed. 24 §Innovation outputs: Findings are controversial here, with some studies showing that family firms are more innovative than non-family firms, while others suggest instead that the opposite is true.25 Moreover, an interesting theme in this growing field of study involves the existence of some paradoxical effects in family firm innovation, which becomemanifest by family firms innovating less despite having the ability to do more. 26Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU 7
Paradoxical Effects in the Development of Innovation Research and practice suggest that the development of innovation increas- ingly requires leveraging external source s of knowledge to cope with the increasing costs for the creation of new knowledge.27While this strategic need is well docu- mented in open innovation literature,28family involvement in a firm affects its willing- ness to engage in open innovation. Evidence indicates that in pursuing non-economic utilities, family firms develop strong co ncerns about potential loss of control.29Such concerns may complicate collaborative re lationships with external partners when open innovation implies restricting the firm ’s control over the product’ s technological trajectory.30Therefore, the propensity to acq uire knowledge outside the firm ’s bound- aries is lower in family firms. At the same t ime, family firms have superior ability to identify opportunities and acq uire knowledge from outside their boundaries because of their non-economic goals, long-term or ientation, and discretion to engage with external stakeholders,31and this accentuates the paradoxical effect.32 Paradoxical Effects in the Adoption of Innovation Adoption of innovation is the process through which a firm: first makes the decision to adopt a new product/service, process, or business model; and then startsusing and integrating it into its processes and business activities. 33Sociological models of innovation diffusion suggest that the decision to adopt an innovation is character-ized by a high level of uncertainty. 34Even when specifications and customer reports are known, and the cost of purchase and use is precisely known, the firm remainsunsure about how the innovation will perform in practice, whether it is suited to the uses it has in mind, and whether it can be easily integrated into its existing oper- ations. Under these circumstances, innovation adoption can put the non-economic utilities of family owners at risk as it reduces the
innovation adoption can put the non-economic utilities of family owners at risk as it reduces the firm ’s control over the way in which business activities are managed and organized. This implies that in the future the firmmay be forced to operate under constraints to organizational actions that could have been avoided by not adopting the innovation. As a result, family firms are likely to show a lower propensity to adopt innovations compared to their non-family counter- parts. However, once the firm has decided to adopt an innovation, the high discretion of family firms (due to their personalized control) lowers the barriers to the integra- tion of the innovation and its actual use. Again, this leads to a paradoxical behavior. The uncertainty surrounding adoption is especially high when a firm is confronted with a discontinuous innovation. 35 Ultimately, creating and capturing the maximum value from innovation in family firms requires unlocking these para doxical effects. Only by doing so will family firms be able to realize the potential of innova tion for creating and sustaining compet- itive advantage over time. Throu ghout this special section in the California Management Review , the contributors show that this can be achieved by carefully aligning the stra- tegic decisions a family firm takes in innovation with its idiosyncratic characteristics. Introducing the Concept of Family-Driven Innovation The FDI framework builds on contingency theory36and is defined as an internally consistent set of strategic innovation decisions that allow family firmsFamily-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms 8 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU
to resolve their innovation paradox by ensuring a close fit between these decisions and the characteristics of the family firm. Applying this perspective means that scholars and practitioners should: §In a first step, they need to consider the internal consistency between the key contingency factors that identify the characteristics of family firms and cap-ture their heterogeneity, as well as the internal consistency between the key contingency factors that capture the heterogeneity of innovation deci- sions. §Then, they need to take into account the fitbetween the contingencies of heterogeneity of innovation decisions and the contingencies of heterogene- ity of family firms. §Finally, they should recognize that when there is a misfit between innovation decisions and family firm characteristics, creating a competitive advantage through innovation in family firms is unlikely. Conversely, if innovation decisions match the characteristics of the family firm, then FDI is possible and can lead to the creation of competitive advantage through innovation. The FDI model is depicted in Figure 1. Heterogeneity of Family Firms As noted, there are three contingency factors that can be used to describe the characteristics of family firms and capture their heterogeneity —the where , how,and what of family firms. The Where of Family Firms Family willingness is defined as the “favorable disposition of the involved family to engage in distinctive behavior. It encompasses the goals, intentions, and motivations that drive the family involved to influence the firm ’s behavior in direc- tions that are different from those pursued by firms without family involvement.”37 It refers to the family owners ’goals and intentions in response to the question FIGURE 1. A Model of Family-Driven Innovation Family willingness Where do we want to go? FITLocus of innovation search Where do we search for the knowledge and resources we need to innovate? T ype of Innovation What do we want to
search for the knowledge and resources we need to innovate? T ype of Innovation What do we want to innovate?Approach to innovation management How do we want to manage the innovation process?Family ability as discretion How can we go there?Family ability as resources What do we use/need to go there?Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU 9
“Where do we want to go ?”For example, some family firms may be more oriented to pursuing family-oriented goals such as family harmony, family social status, and family identity linkage, whereas others may be more oriented to pursuing non- family-oriented goals such as pure profit maximization.38 The How of Family Firms Family ability as discretion is defined as “the discretion of the [involved] family to direct, allocate, add to, or dispose of a firm ’s resources. It also includes latitude in selecting the goals of the organization and in choosing among the range of feasiblestrategic, structural, and tactical decisions. ” 39The organizational authority arises from the family owners ’power and legitimacy, which is a function of the struc- tures, governance mechanisms, and decision-making processes that regulate and constrain the discretion of family owners. It responds to the question: “How can we go there ?”For example, the family ’s strategic control of a firm ’s assets relative to its ownership may be enhanced through the establishment of pyramids, cross- holdings, and dual voting class shares,40and the family may be able to bypass the board when making strategic decisions.41On the other hand, powerful non-family stakeholders such as board members and shareholders may constrain the ability of family owners and managers to exercise their discretion to act. Moreover, themonitoring and incentive systems adopted in the family firm may constrain the managers ’freedom to pursue activities in the family owners ’interest instead of the business ’s interest. 42 The What of Family Firms Finally, there is also a resource-based component of ability that we call family ability as resources . It refers to the family ’s power to act and the resources and capabil- ities that family owners need to deploy in order to pursue their goals and lead thefirm in the desired direction. It responds to the question: “What do we use/need to go there?”For example, managerial power is
It responds to the question: “What do we use/need to go there?”For example, managerial power is constrained if the resources available to the firm ’s dominant coalition are reduced. 43This component of family ability mostly builds on the resource-based view,44which has emphasized the role of family firms ’ unique resources and capabilities —in terms of higher or lower stocks of social, human, and financial capital45—in building a competitive advantage.46 Heterogeneity of Innovation Decisions Innovation is a very complex concept that has received many alternative definitions and has been operationalized in many ways in the literature.47For the purpose of this study, we conceptualize innovation as the set of activities through which a firm conceives, designs, manufactures, and introduces a new product, service, process, or business model.48 Research points to the critical importance of defining a clear innovation strategy for increasing a firm ’s ability to use innovation to create competitive advantage.49The decisions that need to be taken to develop a proper innovation strategy respond to three key questions: Where do we search for the knowledge and resources we need to innovate? How do we want to manage the innovation process? What do we want to innovate?Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms 10 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU
The Where of Innovation Strategy This decision refers to the directions in which a firm searches for the resources and knowledge it needs to feed its innovation process. A first critical strategic decision concerns the depth of the firm ’s search into its existing knowl- edge base50and finding the right balance between the exploration of novelty and the exploitation of existing knowledge.51A second strategic decision involves search breadth and captures the extent to which a firm searches across multipletechnology domains. 52Although it incurs higher costs than searching extensively within a narrower set of knowledge domains,53it can enable radical innovation.54 A further strategic decision concerns the extent to which a firm uses knowledgeelements from the past or from newly created technologies. 55Knowledge from the past, which comes from the tradition of the firm or the tradition of the terri-tory in which it operates, can be a valuable resource in innovation because its use fosters increased reliability, decreased risk of retaliation, and the uniqueness of innovation. 56However, excessive reliance upon past knowledge creates the risks of path-dependence, inflexibility, and conservatism, and it can reduce a firm ’s capability to respond quickly to changing market needs.57 The How of Innovation Strategy This decision concerns the strategic approach that a firm applies in the development and exploitation of its innovations. The most important aspect is the degree of openness of the innovation process. Research on open innovation suggests that this has become a strategic priority for firms competing in high-pace, high-velocity industries to leverage both inbound and outbound flows of knowl- edge and technology to increase revenues and reduce the costs of their innovation process.58Of course, open innovation is not a “one size fits all ”strategic approach and a firm has to decide what is the right degree of openness to be applied in its innovation process.59Using
has to decide what is the right degree of openness to be applied in its innovation process.59Using open innovation means systematically relying on external sources of knowledge and technology to accelerate internal develop-ment. 60On the other hand, open innovation in the exploitation phase means sys- tematically searching for opportunities to sell proprietary technologies outside thefirm core business, through approaches such as out-licensing agreements, joint ventures, or new venture spin-offs. 61In addition to applying proprietary technol- ogies for the development of new products/services, processes, and business mod-els, this strategic approach allows the firm to gain additional monetary benefits that help increase the returns on innovation investments. 62An open strategy in the development and exploitation phases of the innovation process entails a reduction of the level of control that the firm can exert and exposes it to increased risks of appropriability and knowledge spillovers.63 The What of Innovation Strategy This refers to the different types of innovations that a firm can decide to invest in. A firm may choose to focus its efforts and resources to innovate its prod- ucts/services64or to change its business model.65Often, business model innova- tions entail changes and modification to the products/services that a firm offers.Today there is increasing understanding that business model innovation representsFamily-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU 11
a very powerful source of competitive advantage, although it requires deeper changes to established routines and mental models. Another aspect regarding the what dimension of innovation is the distinction between product/service innova- tion or process innovation.66In the former, innovation concerns changes to its offer, which are highly and immediately visible to its clients. In the latter, innova-tion concerns improvements to the processes (e.g., operations, logistics, and admin- istration), changes that are not immediately visible to its clients. This suggests that product/service innovation entails higher risks for the firm as it potentially has a direct impact on its market positioning and its identity in the eyes of its clients. Finally, the degree of change that characterizes a firm ’s innovation efforts relates to dichotomy between radical and incremental innovation. 67With radical innovation, the level of risk stemming from a departure from existing organizational routines, as well as the resource commitments that such innovation entails,68is higher as compared to incremental innovation, and this is an important consideration in FDI. Family-Driven Innovation and Competitive Advantage FDI is a matter of achieving fit among the key drivers of heterogeneity of family firms —the involved family ’swillingness ,ability as discretion , and ability as resources —and the key drivers of heterogeneity of innovation decisions —thelocus of innovation search , the approaches used to manage the innovation process , and the types of innovation in which the firm invests . Creating fit among these contingency factors is of pivotal importance to resolving the paradox in family firm innovation, unlocking the innovation potential of family firms, and allowing them to build competitive advantage. This emerges from a number of examples (from our consultancy and research experience) in both the innovation and family business fields. One ofthese is particularly illustrative of how
in both the innovation and family business fields. One ofthese is particularly illustrative of how FDI operates. A family firm that is among the worldwide leaders in vacuum technology struggled for years to implement an innovation strategy based on developing radically new products by searching for knowledge in new technology domains through a closed innovation model. This strategy was strongly supported by the Director of Corporate R&D, who convinced the Top Management Team (TMT) to invest in it. Unfortunately, this approach was largely unsuccessful and the firm suffered from a competitive disadvantage vis-à-vis its international competitors for several years. The main reason underlying this failure was the lack of alignment between the strategy and the characteristics of the family firm itself, where the ownersstrongly prioritized the pursuit of non-economic goals instead of maximizing prof- itability results. This orientation proved itself incompatible with the idea of aggres- sively investing in radical innovation, even though the TMT had initially approvedthis plan. Moreover, the firm lacked the financial resources to invest in costly and risky R&D projects due to a parsimonious approach in the management of the family capital. The family owners were also concerned about keeping control over the firm and preserving the family identity, and this had led over the years to a lack of professionalization in middle management. These resource constraints meant that the firm was unable to invest the large amounts of money needed for internally developing new knowledge in unfamiliar technology domains.Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms 12 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU
After years of disappointing innovation results, the firm ’s performance improved when, after a process of intra-family succession, the new owners reduced the importance of non-economic goals and became more oriented toward achieving strong profitability results. This was now more consistent with the radical innovation strategy that the firm considered a critical cornerstone ofsuccessfully competing against larger players in the vacuum technology industry. At the same time, the Director of Corporate R&D started to implement an open approach to managing both the development and exploitation phases of the inno- vation process. This was key to circumventing the lack of financial resources and professionalization that in the past (when the firm worked according to the closed innovation model) had continued to characterize the firm and had hindered the development of new knowledge in distant technology domains. Due to these changes, the family firm realized FDI —i.e., a close fit between the dimensions of its innovation strategy and its idiosyncratic characteristics. This resolved its innovation paradox and unlocked the potential of innovation to create competitive advantage. Some Directions for Future Research on Family-Driven Innovation In this article, we have developed an FDI model and argued that only by obtaining an appropriate fit between the family firm heterogeneity dimensions and the strategic innovation decision heterogeneity dimensions it is possible to overcome the paradox that hinders innovation in family firms and thereby unlock the innova- tion potential for competitive advantage in this particular organizational setting. Of course, more theoretical and empirical research is needed to further elaborate on this model and test our contention that FDI has a positive impacton innovation and firm performance. The FDI framework developed in this article will hopefully serve as a useful tool for scholars to further our knowledge on innovation in family firms in
serve as a useful tool for scholars to further our knowledge on innovation in family firms in an integrated and structured way. Some dimensions along which research on family-driven innovation could progress are summarizedhereinafter (a table reporting some promising research questions for a research agenda on FDI can be downloaded at the following link: <http://www.diminin. it/?p=1974>): §Fit between willingness and innovation strategy. In this area, future research should study the fit between the goals pursued by the family and the innova-tion strategy adopted by the family firm. §Fit between ability as discretion and innovation strategy .H e r es c h o l a r ss h o u l ds t u d y the fit between the mechanisms underlying family owner discretion to orientthe behavior of the family firm and the innovation strategy adopted. §Fit between ability as resources and innovation strategy . Along this dimension, future scholars should study the fit between the capabilities and resources of family owners and the innovation strategy adopted by the firm. §Fit between different dimensions of the innovation strategy in a particular family firm. Here, future research should study the fit between different dimensionsFamily-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU 13
of the innovation strategy under the effect of different contingency factors related to family firm heterogeneity. §Performance implications of the dimensions of fit . Another area ripe for future research is the impact of different dimensions of fit of the FDI model on firmand innovation performance. This would allow collecting empirical evidence for the theoretical arguments developed in this article on the value of FDI in overcoming the innovation paradox characterizing family firms and unlock- ing their innovation potential. §Temporal dynamics in FDI . Many scholars emphasize the time-variant nature of family firms and the importance of adopting a temporal perspective to under- stand family business behavior. 69To the best of our knowledge, no study has investigated how the innovation behavior of family firms changes over time. Future research should therefore attempt to understand how family businessinnovation and particularly FDI change over time. The Contributions The point we want to make in this article is that this new comprehensive frame- work that we call FDI can guide future resear ch and practice in the flourishing field of family firm innovation. The four articles in this special section illustrate the usefulnessof the FDI framework. From their own indivi dual perspectives, these four independent studies help us understand how FDI can be used to explain the mechanisms through which family firms build and sustain their competitive advantage through innovation. First, the contribution in this issue of California Management Review by Miller, Wright, Le Breton-Miller, and Scholes [ “Resources and Innovation in Family Businesses: The Janus-Face of Socio-Emotional Preferences ”] clearly points to the idiosyncrasy of goal setting in family business. Their analysis builds on a comparisonbetween socio-emotional wealth and speed of change in the environment to identify relevant dimensions for the fit of what we call the where dimensions of FDI (willingness of
relevant dimensions for the fit of what we call the where dimensions of FDI (willingness of family owners and sour ces of knowledge resources for innova- tion) and the what dimensions (ability as resource s of the family owners and types of innovation). The results of this contribution are summarized in a four-by-fourframework that clearly identifies the tensions on the resources that become relevant for each of the four quadrants depicted. Bogers, Boyd, and Hollensen [ “Managing Turbulence: Business Model Development in a Family-Owned Airline ”] follow with a single case study span- ning 60 years and illuminating the contribution of family ownership, values, and rigidities to the evolution of a business model in a sector characterized by high turbulence. In so doing, this article clearly exemplifies one of the four quadrantsdepicted in Miller et al. ’s framework and contributes to understanding the fit of thewhat dimensions (ability as resources of the family owners and types of inno- vation) and the how dimensions (ability as discretion of the family owners and approaches used to manage the innovation process) in the FDI framework. Bennedsen and Foss [ “Family Assets and Liabilities in the Innovation Process ”] employ a resource-based view of strategy to identify the evolution ofFamily-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms 14 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU
family assets that have an impact on both the where dimensions of the FDI framework (willingness of family owners and sources of knowledge resources for innovation) and the howdimensions (ability as discretion of the family owners and approaches used to manage the innovation process). The point made in this article is that adynamic tension exists and that what were previously identified as family assets can turn into family liabilities and limit the scope and range of innovation within family businesses. Finally, Holt and Daspit [ “Diagnosing Innovation Readiness in Family Firms ”] introduce the concepts of innovation readiness , suggesting a move upstream from our analysis to explore the pre-conditions that generate FDI. This contribu-tion adopts a theory-grounded approach to identify a mechanism that can guide the analysis of the fit of the FDI framework along the where dimensions (willing- ness of family owners and sources of knowledge resources for innovation). Conclusion This article demonstrates that innovation in the context of family firms is typi- cally characterized by a paradox, manifested in family firms innovating less despite having the ability to do more. To solve this paradox and unlock the potential for innovation in family firms, a close fit is req uired between the heterogeneity of innova- tion decisions and the heterogeneity of the family firm ’s idiosyncratic characteristics. We call this internally consistent set of strategic decisions Family-Driven Innovation. Scholars and business executives should take an integrated perspective to determine the contingencies of the where ,howand what that capture the hetero- geneity of innovation decisions and those capturing the heterogeneity of familyfirms, as well as taking into account the fit between these two sets of contingencies as a key mechanism through which family involvement in a business organization can lead competitive advantage through innovation. The integrated framework outlined in this
can lead competitive advantage through innovation. The integrated framework outlined in this article is useful for organizing exist- ing and future research into the intriguing topic of innovation in family firms. FDI isrelevant not only for family firms —the predominant form of business organization around the globe —but also for our general understanding of innovation processes and the mutual influences between the type of corporate governance of organizationand innovation. Notes 1. R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, “Corporate Ownership around the World, ”Journal of Finance , 54/2 (April 1999): 471-517; B. Villalonga and R. Amit, “How Are U.S. Family Firms Controlled? ”Review of Financial Studies , 22/8 (August 2009): 3047-3091. 2.“The Power of Family Dynasties, ”The Economist , April 18, 2015, <www.economist.com/news/ leaders/21648639-enduring-power-families-business-and-politics-should-trouble-believers>. 3. McKinsey & Company, “The Five Attributes of Enduring Family Businesses, ”2010, <www. mckinsey.com/insights/organization/the_five_attributes_of_enduring_family_businesses>. 4.“Studying the Economic Impact of Family Businesses —A Collection of Facts, ”Tharawat Maga- zine, 22 (May-July 2014). 5. I.C. Botero, C.D. Cruz, A. Massis, and M. Nordqvist, “Family Business Research in the European Context, ”European Journal of International Management , 9/2 (2015): 139-159.Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU 15
6.“Global Data Points, ”Family Firm Institute, 2015, <www.ffi.org/?page=globaldatapoints>. 7. E. Memili, H. Fang, J.J. Chrisman, and A. De Massis, “The Impact of Small- and Medium-Sized Family Firms on Economic Growth, ”Small Business Economics (2015), in press. DOI: 10.1007/ s11187-015-9670-0. 8. C. Banbury and W. Mitchell, “The Effect of Introducing Important Incremental Innovations on Market Share and Business Survival, ”Strategic Management Journal , 16/1 (Summer 1995): 161-182; R.J. Calantone, K. Chan, and A.S. Cui, “Decomposing Product Innovativeness and its Effects on New Product Success, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 23/5 (September 2006): 408-421. 9. R. Blundell, R. Griffiths, and J. Van Reenen, “Market Share, Market Value and Innovation in a Panel of British Manufacturing Firms, ”Review of Economic Studies , 66/3 (July 1999): 529-554. 10. “The Power of Family Dynasties,” The Economist , September 24, 2009, <www.economist.com/ node/14517406>. 11. “The World ’s Most Innovative Companies, ”Forbes , 2014, <www.forbes.com/innovative- companies/list/#page:1_sort:0_direction:asc_search:_filter:Europe_filter:All%20industries>. 12. H. Simon, Hidden Champions: Lessons from 500 of the World ’s Best Unknown Companies (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 1996). 13. J.J. Chrisman, J.H. Chua, A. De Massis, F. Frattini, and M. Wright, “The Ability and Willing- ness Paradox in Family Firm Innovation, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 32/3 (May 2015): 310-318. 14. P. Lawrence and J. Lorsch, “Differentiation and Integration in Complex Organizations, ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 12/1 (June 1967): 1-47. 15. For example see G. Ahuja, C.M. Lampert, and V. Tandon, “Moving beyond Schumpeter: Man- agement Research on the Determinants of Technological Innovation, ”Academy of Management Annals , 2/1 (2008): 1-98. 16. A. De Massis, F. Frattini, and U. Lichtenthaler, “Research on Technological Innovation in Family Firms: Present Debates and
and U. Lichtenthaler, “Research on Technological Innovation in Family Firms: Present Debates and Future Directions,” Family Business Review , 26/1 (March 2013): 10-31; P. Duran, N. Kammerlander, M. van Essen, and T. Zellweger, “Doing More with Less: Innovation Input and Output in Family Firms, ”Academy of Management Journal ,( 2 0 1 5 )i n press. 17. For example, see J.J. Chrisman and P.C. Patel, “Variations in R&D Investments of Family and Non-Family Firms: Behavioral Agency and Myopic Loss Aversion Perspectives, ”Academy of Management Journal , 55/4 (August 2012): 976-997; L.R. Gómez-Mejía, J. Campbell, G. Martin, R.E. Hoskisson, M. Makri, and D.G. Sirmon, “Socioemotional Wealth as a Mixed Gamble: Revisiting Family Firm R&D Investments with the Behavioral Agency Model, ”Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 38/6 (November 2014): 1351-1374. 18. A. König, N. Kammerlander, and A. Enders, “The Family Innovator ’s Dilemma: How Family Influence Affects the Adoption of Discontinuous Technologies by Incumbent Firms, ”Academy of Management Review , 38/3 (July 2013): 418-441; J.J. Chrisman, H. Fang, J. Kotlar, and A. De Massis, “A Note on Family Influence and the Adoption of Discontinuous Technologies in Family Firms, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 32/3 (May 2014): 384-388. 19. J. Kotlar, A. De Massis, F. Frattini, M. Bianchi, and H. Fang, “Technology Acquisition in Family and Non-Family Firms: A Longitudinal Analysis of Spanish Manufacturing Firms, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 30/6 (November 2013): 1073-1088. 20. De Massis, Frattini, and Lichtenthaler, op. cit. 21. The involvement of family owners in management results in unique resources and capabilities (e.g., E. Gedajlovic and M. Carney, “Markets, Hierarchies, and Families: Toward a Transaction Cost Theory of the Family Firm, ”Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 34/6 (November 2010): 1145-1172). Different types of controlling owners may have different investment horizons, riskaversion,
Different types of controlling owners may have different investment horizons, riskaversion, diversification plans, return aspirations, and governance structures, which are likely toaffect innovation activities and outcomes (see, e.g., R.E. Hoskisson, M.A. Hitt, R.A. Johnson, and W. Grossman, “Conflicting Voices: The Effects of Institutional Ownership Heterogeneity and Internal Governance on Corporate Innovation Strategies, ”Academy of Management Journal , 45/4 (August 2002): 697-716). For instance, the pursuit of non-economic goals may reduce theirwillingness to undertake collaborative innovation projects (Kotlar, De Massis, Frattini, Bianchi, and Fang, op. cit.). Moreover, family involvement in ownership, management, and governancecan result in developing unique resources that can then be leveraged in ways that affect innova-tion. For example, the unique characteristics of the social capital of family firms can affect their ability to use external knowledge sources during the innovation process or adopt functional structures rather than cross-functional teams to organize the innovation process (A. De Massis,Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms 16 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU
F. Frattini, E. Pizzurno, and L. Cassia, “Product Innovation in Family versus Non-Family Firms: an Exploratory Analysis, ”Journal of Small Business Management , 53/1 (January 2015): 1-36. 22. See, e.g., Kotlar, De Massis, Frattini, Bianchi, and Fang, op. cit. 23. Literature on family business innovation is largely consistent in showing that family firms invest less in R&D than non-family firms (see, e.g., J.H. Block, “R&D Investments in Family and Founder Firms: An Agency Perspective,” Journal of Business Venturing , 27/2 (March 2002): 248-265). However, due to their long-term orientation, the variability of R&D invest-ments is greater in family firms (Chrisman and Patel, op. cit.). A notable exception is Asaba ’s study (S. Asaba, “Patient Investment of Family Firms in the Japanese Electric Machinery Industry, ”Asia Pacific Journal of Management , 30/3 (September 2013): 697-715, DOI: 10.1007/s10490-012-9319-3) showing that family firms tend to invest more than their coun-terparts when financial factors and environmental uncertainty are controlled. Moreover,Sciascia and colleagues (S. Sciascia, M. Nordqvist, P. Mazzola, and A. De Massis, “Family Own- ership and R&D Intensity in Small and Medium-Sized Firms, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 32/3 (May 2015): 349-360, DOI: 10.1111/jpim.12204) show that in SMEs, the relationship between family ownership and R&D intensity is contingent on the way the familyinvests its wealth. Family ownership is a negative correlate of R&D intensity when family wealth and firm equity overlap is high, implying that the more a family controls firm owner- ship, the less the SME is inclined to invest in R&D. Conversely, if the portion of family wealthinvested in the firm is low, cautious behavior is replaced by a more innovative attitude result-ing in higher R&D expenditure. 24. Regarding the impact of family involvement on innovation activities, De Massis and colleagues (De Massis, Frattini, Pizzurno, and Cassia, op. cit.) analyze
activities, De Massis and colleagues (De Massis, Frattini, Pizzurno, and Cassia, op. cit.) analyze how and why the anatomy of theproduct innovation process differs between family and non-family firms. The analysis showsthat due to their distinctive characteristics, family businesses differ with regard to product innovation strategies and organization of the innovation process. For instance, family firms use a functional organization in the innovation process, with high levels of decisional auton-omy given to project leaders. Throughout this process, they rely on a higher number of collab- orations with universities and public research centers, while the organizational climate is largely informal and unstructured. Conversely, non-family firms predominantly establishcross-functional teams to carry out these projects, with limited delegation of decisional author-ity to project leaders and a highly structured and formalized organizational climate. Kotlar and colleagues (J. Kotlar, A. De Massis, H. Fang, and F. Frattini, “Strategic Reference Points in Family Firms, ”Small Business Economics , 43/3 (October 2014): 597-619; J. Kotlar, A. De Massis, H. Fang, and F. Frattini, “Profitability Goals, Control Goals, and the R&D Investment Decisions of Family and Non-Family Firms, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 31/6 (November 2014): 1128-1145) offer other examples of studies on how family involvement affects innova- tion activities. 25. Concerning how family involvement affects innovation outputs, the findings from existing research are controversial. Some studies show that family involvement is negatively associatedwith the quantity and quality of patents obtained (e.g., C.L. Chin, Y.J. Chen, G. Kleinman, andP. Lee, “Corporate Ownership Structure and Innovation: Evidence from Taiwan ’s Electronics Industry, ”Journal of Accounting Auditing Finance , 24/1 (January 2009): 145-175) while others show that family involvement positively affects innovation outputs (e.g.,
145-175) while others show that family involvement positively affects innovation outputs (e.g., P. Westhead, “Ambi- tions, External Environment and Strategic Factor Differences between Family and Non-FamilyCompanies, ”Entrepreneurship & Regional Development , 9/2 (1997): 127-158). 26. See Chrisman, Chua, De Massis, Frattini, and Wright, op. cit. 27. J. West and M. Bogers, “Leveraging External Sources of Innovation: A Review of Research on Open Innovation, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 31/4 (July 2014): 814-831. 28. See here H. Chesbrough, W. Vanhaverbecke, and J. West, New Frontiers in Open Innovation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014); E. Huizingh, “Open Innovation: State of the Art and Future Perspectives, ”Technovation , 31/1 (January 2011): 2-9. 29. L.R. Gómez-Mejía, K.T. Haynes, M. Núñez-Nickel, K.J.L. Jacobson, and J. Moyano-Fuentes, “Socioemotional Wealth and Business Risks in Family-Controlled Firms: Evidence from Spanish Olive Oil Mills, ”Administrative Science Quarterly ,  52/1 (March 2007): 106-137. 30. E. Almirall and R. Casadesus-Masanell, “Open Versus Closed Innovation: A Model of Discov- ery and Divergence, ”Academy of Management Review , 35/1 (January 2010): 27-47. 31. P.C. Patel and J.O. Fiet, “Knowledge Combination and the Potential Advantages of Family Firms in Searching for Opportunities, ”Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 35/6 (November 2011): 1179-1197.Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU 17
32. Kotlar, De Massis, Frattini, Bianchi, and Fang, op. cit. 33. T.H. Hannan and J.M. McDowell, “The Determinants of Technology Adoption: The Case of the Banking Firm, ”The RAND Journal of Economics , 15/3 (Autumn 1984): 328-335. 34. R.S. Burt, “Social Contagion and Innovation: Cohesion versus Structural Equivalence, ” The American Journal of Sociology , 92/6 (1987): 1287-1335. 35. Recent research (A. König, N. Kammerlander, and A. Enders, “The Family Innovator ’s Dilemma: How Family Influence Affects the Adoption of Discontinuous Technologies byIncumbent Firms, ”Academy of Management Review , 38/3 (July 2013): 418-441) suggests that family firms adopt discontinuous innovations later than their non-family counterparts, butwhen they decide to adopt them, implementation and integration happen more rapidly. 36. Lawrence and Lorsch, op. cit.37. In introducing the concepts of willingness ,ability as discretion , and ability as resources , we build on De Massis and colleagues ’conceptualization of willingness and ability [A. De Massis, J. Kotlar, J.H. Chua, and J.J. Chrisman, “Ability and Willingness as Sufficiency Conditions for Family- Oriented Particularistic Behavior: Implications for Theory and Empirical Studies, ”Journal of Small Business Management , 52/2 (2014): 344-364] and claim that explicitly considering willing- ness and ability and taking into account their varying degrees in family firms enables arriving at a good understanding of the heterogeneity of family firms. It should be noted that De Massis and colleagues in their study recognize the existence of a resource-based component of ability,but only address ability as discretion. 38. J.J. Chrisman, J.H. Chua, A.W. Pearson, and T. Barnett, “Family Involvement, Family Influ- ence, and Family Centered Non-Economic Goals in Small Firms, ”Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 36/2 (March 2012): 267-293; J. Kotlar and A. De Massis, “Goal Setting in Family Firms: Goal Diversity, Social Interactions, and
J. Kotlar and A. De Massis, “Goal Setting in Family Firms: Goal Diversity, Social Interactions, and Collective Commitment to Family-CenteredGoals, ”Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 37/6 (November 2013): 1263-1288. 39. De Massis, Kotlar, Chua, and Chrisman, op. cit., p. 346.40. S. Claessens, S. Djankov, and L.H. Lang “The Separation of Ownership and Control in East Asian Corporations,” Journal of Financial Economics , 58/1-2 (October/November 2000): 81-112. 41. M. Carney and E. Gedajlovic, “The Coupling of Ownership and Control and the Allocation of Financial Resources: Evidence from Hong Kong, ”Journal of Management Studies , 39/1 (January 2002): 123-146; J.W. Lorsch and E. MacIver, Pawns or Potentates: The Reality of America ’sC o r p o r a t e Boards (Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 1989). 42. J.J. Chrisman, J.H. Chua, and R.A. Litz, “Comparing the Agency Costs of Family and Non-Family Firms: Conceptual Issues and Exploratory Evidence, ”Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice ,2 8 / 4 (June 2004): 335-354. 43. S. Finkelstein and D.C. Hambrick, “Top-Management-Team Tenure and Organizational Out- comes: The Moderating Role of Managerial Discretion, ”Administrative Science Quarterly , 35/3 (September 1990): 484-503; D.C. Hambrick and S. Finkelstein, “Managerial Discretion: A Bridge between Polar Views of Organizational Outcomes, ”Research in Organizational Behavior , 9/2 (1987): 369-406. 44. J. Barney, “Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive Advantage, ”Journal of Management , 17/1 (March 1991): 99-120. 45. D.G. Sirmon and M.A. Hitt, “Managing Resources: Linking Unique Resources, Management, and Wealth Creation in Family Firms, ”Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 27/4 (Summer 2003): 339-358 46. T.G. Habbershon and M.L. Williams “A Resource-Based Framework for Assessing the Strategic Advantages of Family Firms, ”Family Business Review , 12/1 (March 1999): 1-25. 47. J. Tidd and J.R. Bessant, Managing Innovation: Integrating Technological, Market
1999): 1-25. 47. J. Tidd and J.R. Bessant, Managing Innovation: Integrating Technological, Market and Organizational Change ,5thEdition (New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2013). 48. C. Freeman, Economics of Industrial Innovation (London: Pinter Publisher, 1976). 49. G.P. Pisano, “You Need an Innovation Strategy, ”Harvard Business Review , 93/6 (June 2015): 44-54; M. Dodgson, D. Gann, and A. Salter, The Management of Technological Innovation: Strategy & Practice (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008). 50. A.S. Miner, P. Bassof, and C. Moorman, “Organizational Improvisation and Learning: A Field Study, ”Administrative Science Quarterly , 46/2 (June 2001): 304-337. 51. A.K. Gupta, K.G. Smith, and C.E. Shalley, “The Interplay between Exploration and Exploitation, ” Academy of Management Journal , 49/4 (August 2006): 693-706. 52. R. Katila and G. Ahuja, “Something Old, Something New: A Longitudinal Study of Search Behavior and New Product Introduction, ”Academy of Management Journal , 45/6 (December 2002): 1183-1194.Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms 18 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU
53. K. Laursen and A. Salter, “Open for Innovation: The Role of Openness in Explaining Innovation Performance among UK Manufacturing Firms, ”Strategic Management Journal , 27/2 (February 2006): 131-150. 54. L. Rosenkopf and P. Almeida, “Overcoming Local Search through Alliances and Mobility, ” Management Science , 49/6 (June 2003): 751-766. 55. A. Nerkar, “Old is Gold? The Value of Temporal Exploration in the Creation of New Knowledge, ” Management Science , 49/2 (February 2003): 211-229. 56. R. Katila, “New Product Search over Time, Past Ideas in Their Prime? ”Academy of Management Journal , 45/5 (October 2002): 995-1010. 57. D.N. Barron, E. West, and M.T. Hannan, “A Time to Grow and a Time to Die: Growth and Mortality of Credit Unions in New York City, 1914-1990, ”American Journal of Sociology 100/2 (1994): 381-421. 58. J. West and M. Bogers, “Leveraging External Sources of Innovation: A Review of Research on Open Innovation, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 31/4 (July 2013): 814-831. 59. V. Lazzarotti and R. Manzini, “Different Modes of Open Innovation: a Theoretical Framework and an Empirical Study, ”International Journal of Innovation Management , 13/4 (December 2009): 615-636. 60. V. Parida, M. Westerberg, and J. Frishammar, “Inbound Open Innovation Activities in High- Tech SMEs: The Impact on Innovation Performance, ”Journal of Small Business Management , 50/2 (April 2012): 283-309. 61. A. Di Minin, F. Frattini, and A. Piccaluga, “Fiat: Open Innovation in a Downturn (1993- 2003), ”California Management Review , 52/3 (Spring 2010): 132-159. 62. M. Bianchi, V. Chiesa, and F. Frattini, “Selling Technological Knowledge: Managing The Com- plexities of Technology Transactions,” Research-Technology Management , 54/2 (March/April 2011): 18-26. 63. A. Hoecht and P. Trott, “Trust Risk and Control in the Management of Collaborative Technol- ogy Development, ”International Journal of Innovation Management , 3/3 (September 1999): 257-270; D. Chiaroni, V.
”International Journal of Innovation Management , 3/3 (September 1999): 257-270; D. Chiaroni, V. Chiesa, and F. Frattini, “The Open Innovation Journey: How Firms Dynamically Implement the Emerging Innovation Management Paradigm, ”Technovation, 31/1 (January 2011): 34-43. 64. H. Ernst, “Success Factors of New Product Development: A Review of Empirical Literature, ” International Journal of Management Reviews , 4/1 (March 2002): 1-40. 65. H. Chesbrough, “Business Model Innovation: Opportunities and Barriers, ”Long Range Planning , 43/2-3 (April 2010): 354-363. 66. J. Utterback and W.J. Abernathy, “A Dynamic Model of Process and Product Innovation, ” Omega , 3/6 (December 1975): 639-656. 67. M. McDermott and G. Colarelli O ’Connor, “Managing Radical Innovation: An Overview of Emergent Strategy Issues, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 19/6 (November 2003): 424-438. 68. R. Veryzer, “Discontinuous Innovation and the New Product Development Process, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 15/4 (July 1998): 304-321. 69. M. Gagné, P. Sharma, and A. De Massis, “The Study of Organizational Behavior in Family Business, ”European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology , 23/5 (2014): 643-656; P. Sharma, C. Salvato, and T. Reay, “Temporal Dimensions of Family Enterprise Research,” Family Business Review , 27/1 (2014): 10-19; P. Sharma, A. De Massis, and M. Gagné, “Family Business: A Fertile Ground for Research on Time, Teams, and Positive Organizational Study, ” European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology , 23/5 (2014): 674-679. California Management Review , Vol. 58, No. 1, pp. 5 –19. ISSN 0008-1256, eISSN 2162-8564. © 2015 by The Regents of the University of California. All rights reserved. Request permission to photocopy or reproduce article content at the University of California Press ’s Reprints and Permissions web page, http://www.ucpress.edu/journals.php?p=reprints, or via email: jpermissions@ucpress.edu. DOI: 10.1525/
or via email: jpermissions@ucpress.edu. DOI: 10.1525/ cmr.2015.58.1.5.Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU 19
Family-Driven Innovation: RESOLVING THE PARADOX IN FAMILY FIRMS Alfredo De Massis Alberto Di Minin Federico Frattini This article presents an integrated, contingency perspective on family firm innovation called Family-Driven Inno- vation (FDI). The framework highlights the need for consistency between a family firm ’s strategic innovation decisions and its idiosyncrasies to achieve and sustain competitive advantage through innovation. This article also offers some directions for future research on FDI and serves as an introduction to this special section onfamily firms. (Keywords: Innovation, Innovation Management, Family Firms) Family firms are the most ubiquitous form of business organization globally,1and the enduring influence of families on business and soci- ety is an essential part of any world economy.2In the USA, one-third of the S&P 500 firms are either controlled or owned by the founding family,3and family firms account for 80-90% of private sector firms, generate 63% of national GDP, and employ 57% of the total workforce.4In Europe, the importance of family firms is even greater.5Family firms also significantly contrib- ute to the growth of economies in South and East Asia, Latin America, and theMiddle East, 6and recent empirical research has shown how the proportion of firms under family control significantly affects economic growth.7Thus, scholars and practitioners are paying increasing attention to understanding the distinctive behavior of this form of business organization. Decades of research on innovation on family firms have produced mixed results. Innovation is a vital source of competitive advantage8and an important determinant of superior performance.9However, family firm innovation is often characterized by a dual nature. On the one hand, family firms are conventionallyseen as conservative, path-dependent, and ultimately less innovative than other types of organizations. 10On the other hand, statistics show that family owners con- trol more --- types of organizations. 10On the other hand, statistics show that family owners con- trol more than 50% of Europe ’s most innovative firms.11Consider, for example, the Mittelstand family firms in Germany, which are internationally renowned for their CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU 5
capacity to successfully focus on innovation in order to stay ahead of potential competitors in their tech- nological niche market.12Family-owned companies such as Beretta, Miquel y Costas Group, Pollet, andVan Eeghen are well known for often being the firstto embrace impactful innovations in their respective industries. Recent scholarly work has suggested that innovation in the context of family firms is charac-terized by a paradox, which is manifested by family firms innovating less despite having the ability to innovate more than their non-family counterparts. 13 This in turn has led to two key questions that bothscholars and practitioners have recently attempted to address. How can family owners and managers resolve this paradox and thereby unlock the inno- vation potential of their organizations? More gener- ally, how can they resolve this paradox and build competitive advantage through innovation? This article serves to introduce the California Management Review special sec- tion on innovation in family firms. It also contributes to the current debate onfamily firm innovation by suggesting an integrated and contingency perspective 14 and by proposing a model of competitive advantage through innovation in familyfirms. More specifically, it introduces the concept of Family-Driven Innovation (FDI), the internally consistent set of strategic decisions that allow a family firm to resolve the innovation paradox by ensuring a close fit between these decisions and the idiosyncratic characteristics of the family firm. Three contingency factors describe the characteristics of family firms and capture their heterogeneity. They are the where ,how, and what of family firms that capture, respectively, the direc- tion where the family firm wants to go (as expressed by the family owners ’goals and intentions, i.e., their “willingness ”to behave), the discretion the family firm has to move in that direction (which is a function of the structures, governance mech-anisms, and
has to move in that direction (which is a function of the structures, governance mech-anisms, and decision-making processes that constrain the power of family owners,i.e., what we call “ability as discretion ”), and the resources and capabilities that are needed or should be used for family owners to lead the firm toward that direc-tion (what we call “ability as resources ”). Similarly, strategic decisions in innova- tion can be mapped along the same where ,how,a n d what contingency factors, which means deciding where the firm will find the knowledge resources it needs to innovate (e.g., within its existing knowledge base, in new knowledge domains, or searching over time), how the innovation process is managed (e.g., whether the firm follows an open or closed approach to innovation), and what the firm wants to innovate (e.g., whether it will prioritize products/services, processes, or business model innovation and whether more emphasis will be given to radical or incremental innovation). While extant innovation research has investigated an abundance of firm- level drivers of innovation, 15the role of family involvement has only scarcelyAlfredo De Massis is Full Professor of Entrepreneurship & Family Business atLancaster University Management School and Director of the School ’s Centre for Family Business. He serves on the Editorial Boards of ET&P, FBR, SEJ, JFBS, and asChair of the Family Business Research SIG at the European Academy of Management. <a.demassis@lancaster.ac.uk> Alberto Di Minin is Associate Professor at the Institute of Management of the ScuolaSuperiore Sant’ Anna, and Research Fellow with the Berkeley Roundtable on the International Economy. He serves on the Editorial Board of CIM. <a.diminin@sssup.it> Federico Frattini is Associate Professor at the School of Management of Politecnico di Milano and Director of the MBA &EMBA Division of MIP, the Graduate School of Business of Politecnico di Milano. He serves on the Editorial Board ofEJIM.
the Graduate School of Business of Politecnico di Milano. He serves on the Editorial Board ofEJIM. <federico.frattini@polimi.it>Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms 6 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU
been understood so far.16Incorporating the role of family involvement and its effects in innovation studies is important for general management scholars, if they aim to advance knowledge on the most ubiquitous form of business organization worldwide. Readers of this special section will find that the authors of the published articles have considered constructs such as: readiness to innovation, socio-emotionalwealth, core assets and liabilities, external turbulence, and business model evolution as drivers that explain conflicting findings on innovation in family firms. Indeed,scholars have studied the effect of family involvement on a number of aspects of innovation —including R&D investments, 17discontinuous technology adoption,18 and external technology acquisition19—and have examined this effect in light of specific characteristics of family firms such as goals, governance, or resources, depending on the theoretical perspective adopted in each study. Our concept of FDI provides a framework to advance the theory and practice of innovation in family firms. In other words, we argue here that scholars and practitioners need an inte- grated reconceptualization of family involvement and innovation, rather than just examining selected aspects of innovation in family firms and drawing reckless con- clusions based on a narrow set of information. Paradoxical Effects of Family Involvement on Innovation The vast research on innovation has thus far focused on firms where own- ership and management are separate, without explicitly taking into account whathappens when they are combined. 20Unification of ownership and control is typi- cal of family firms, and this endows family firms with distinctive incentives, authority structures, accountability norms, resources, and capabilities.21These characteristics have an impact on how innovation takes place in family firms,and a growing body of research is providing evidence that innovation in family firms is different than in their
body of research is providing evidence that innovation in family firms is different than in their non-family counterparts. 22 Existing research on this topic is nevertheless limited and has focused so far on the effect of family involvement on innovation inputs, activities, and outputs.The key findings are: §Innovation inputs: Existing research is largely consistent in indicating that family firms generally invest less money in R&D compared to their non- family counterparts. 23 §Innovation activities: There are preliminary results suggesting that innova-tion activities are handled differently in family vs. non-family firms, but this area needs much more theoretical and empirical research effort to becompletely developed. 24 §Innovation outputs: Findings are controversial here, with some studies showing that family firms are more innovative than non-family firms, while others suggest instead that the opposite is true.25 Moreover, an interesting theme in this growing field of study involves the existence of some paradoxical effects in family firm innovation, which becomemanifest by family firms innovating less despite having the ability to do more. 26Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU 7
Paradoxical Effects in the Development of Innovation Research and practice suggest that the development of innovation increas- ingly requires leveraging external source s of knowledge to cope with the increasing costs for the creation of new knowledge.27While this strategic need is well docu- mented in open innovation literature,28family involvement in a firm affects its willing- ness to engage in open innovation. Evidence indicates that in pursuing non-economic utilities, family firms develop strong co ncerns about potential loss of control.29Such concerns may complicate collaborative re lationships with external partners when open innovation implies restricting the firm ’s control over the product’ s technological trajectory.30Therefore, the propensity to acq uire knowledge outside the firm ’s bound- aries is lower in family firms. At the same t ime, family firms have superior ability to identify opportunities and acq uire knowledge from outside their boundaries because of their non-economic goals, long-term or ientation, and discretion to engage with external stakeholders,31and this accentuates the paradoxical effect.32 Paradoxical Effects in the Adoption of Innovation Adoption of innovation is the process through which a firm: first makes the decision to adopt a new product/service, process, or business model; and then startsusing and integrating it into its processes and business activities. 33Sociological models of innovation diffusion suggest that the decision to adopt an innovation is character-ized by a high level of uncertainty. 34Even when specifications and customer reports are known, and the cost of purchase and use is precisely known, the firm remainsunsure about how the innovation will perform in practice, whether it is suited to the uses it has in mind, and whether it can be easily integrated into its existing oper- ations. Under these circumstances, innovation adoption can put the non-economic utilities of family owners at risk as it reduces the
innovation adoption can put the non-economic utilities of family owners at risk as it reduces the firm ’s control over the way in which business activities are managed and organized. This implies that in the future the firmmay be forced to operate under constraints to organizational actions that could have been avoided by not adopting the innovation. As a result, family firms are likely to show a lower propensity to adopt innovations compared to their non-family counter- parts. However, once the firm has decided to adopt an innovation, the high discretion of family firms (due to their personalized control) lowers the barriers to the integra- tion of the innovation and its actual use. Again, this leads to a paradoxical behavior. The uncertainty surrounding adoption is especially high when a firm is confronted with a discontinuous innovation. 35 Ultimately, creating and capturing the maximum value from innovation in family firms requires unlocking these para doxical effects. Only by doing so will family firms be able to realize the potential of innova tion for creating and sustaining compet- itive advantage over time. Throu ghout this special section in the California Management Review , the contributors show that this can be achieved by carefully aligning the stra- tegic decisions a family firm takes in innovation with its idiosyncratic characteristics. Introducing the Concept of Family-Driven Innovation The FDI framework builds on contingency theory36and is defined as an internally consistent set of strategic innovation decisions that allow family firmsFamily-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms 8 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU
to resolve their innovation paradox by ensuring a close fit between these decisions and the characteristics of the family firm. Applying this perspective means that scholars and practitioners should: §In a first step, they need to consider the internal consistency between the key contingency factors that identify the characteristics of family firms and cap-ture their heterogeneity, as well as the internal consistency between the key contingency factors that capture the heterogeneity of innovation deci- sions. §Then, they need to take into account the fitbetween the contingencies of heterogeneity of innovation decisions and the contingencies of heterogene- ity of family firms. §Finally, they should recognize that when there is a misfit between innovation decisions and family firm characteristics, creating a competitive advantage through innovation in family firms is unlikely. Conversely, if innovation decisions match the characteristics of the family firm, then FDI is possible and can lead to the creation of competitive advantage through innovation. The FDI model is depicted in Figure 1. Heterogeneity of Family Firms As noted, there are three contingency factors that can be used to describe the characteristics of family firms and capture their heterogeneity —the where , how,and what of family firms. The Where of Family Firms Family willingness is defined as the “favorable disposition of the involved family to engage in distinctive behavior. It encompasses the goals, intentions, and motivations that drive the family involved to influence the firm ’s behavior in direc- tions that are different from those pursued by firms without family involvement.”37 It refers to the family owners ’goals and intentions in response to the question FIGURE 1. A Model of Family-Driven Innovation Family willingness Where do we want to go? FITLocus of innovation search Where do we search for the knowledge and resources we need to innovate? T ype of Innovation What do we want to --- family assets that have an impact on both the where dimensions of the FDI framework (willingness of family owners and sources of knowledge resources for innovation) and the howdimensions (ability as discretion of the family owners and approaches used to manage the innovation process). The point made in this article is that adynamic tension exists and that what were previously identified as family assets can turn into family liabilities and limit the scope and range of innovation within family businesses. Finally, Holt and Daspit [ “Diagnosing Innovation Readiness in Family Firms ”] introduce the concepts of innovation readiness , suggesting a move upstream from our analysis to explore the pre-conditions that generate FDI. This contribu-tion adopts a theory-grounded approach to identify a mechanism that can guide the analysis of the fit of the FDI framework along the where dimensions (willing- ness of family owners and sources of knowledge resources for innovation). Conclusion This article demonstrates that innovation in the context of family firms is typi- cally characterized by a paradox, manifested in family firms innovating less despite having the ability to do more. To solve this paradox and unlock the potential for innovation in family firms, a close fit is req uired between the heterogeneity of innova- tion decisions and the heterogeneity of the family firm ’s idiosyncratic characteristics. We call this internally consistent set of strategic decisions Family-Driven Innovation. Scholars and business executives should take an integrated perspective to determine the contingencies of the where ,howand what that capture the hetero- geneity of innovation decisions and those capturing the heterogeneity of familyfirms, as well as taking into account the fit between these two sets of contingencies as a key mechanism through which family involvement in a business organization can lead competitive advantage through innovation. The integrated framework outlined in this
search for the knowledge and resources we need to innovate? T ype of Innovation What do we want to innovate?Approach to innovation management How do we want to manage the innovation process?Family ability as discretion How can we go there?Family ability as resources What do we use/need to go there?Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU 9
“Where do we want to go ?”For example, some family firms may be more oriented to pursuing family-oriented goals such as family harmony, family social status, and family identity linkage, whereas others may be more oriented to pursuing non- family-oriented goals such as pure profit maximization.38 The How of Family Firms Family ability as discretion is defined as “the discretion of the [involved] family to direct, allocate, add to, or dispose of a firm ’s resources. It also includes latitude in selecting the goals of the organization and in choosing among the range of feasiblestrategic, structural, and tactical decisions. ” 39The organizational authority arises from the family owners ’power and legitimacy, which is a function of the struc- tures, governance mechanisms, and decision-making processes that regulate and constrain the discretion of family owners. It responds to the question: “How can we go there ?”For example, the family ’s strategic control of a firm ’s assets relative to its ownership may be enhanced through the establishment of pyramids, cross- holdings, and dual voting class shares,40and the family may be able to bypass the board when making strategic decisions.41On the other hand, powerful non-family stakeholders such as board members and shareholders may constrain the ability of family owners and managers to exercise their discretion to act. Moreover, themonitoring and incentive systems adopted in the family firm may constrain the managers ’freedom to pursue activities in the family owners ’interest instead of the business ’s interest. 42 The What of Family Firms Finally, there is also a resource-based component of ability that we call family ability as resources . It refers to the family ’s power to act and the resources and capabil- ities that family owners need to deploy in order to pursue their goals and lead thefirm in the desired direction. It responds to the question: “What do we use/need to go there?”For example, managerial power is --- It responds to the question: “What do we use/need to go there?”For example, managerial power is constrained if the resources available to the firm ’s dominant coalition are reduced. 43This component of family ability mostly builds on the resource-based view,44which has emphasized the role of family firms ’ unique resources and capabilities —in terms of higher or lower stocks of social, human, and financial capital45—in building a competitive advantage.46 Heterogeneity of Innovation Decisions Innovation is a very complex concept that has received many alternative definitions and has been operationalized in many ways in the literature.47For the purpose of this study, we conceptualize innovation as the set of activities through which a firm conceives, designs, manufactures, and introduces a new product, service, process, or business model.48 Research points to the critical importance of defining a clear innovation strategy for increasing a firm ’s ability to use innovation to create competitive advantage.49The decisions that need to be taken to develop a proper innovation strategy respond to three key questions: Where do we search for the knowledge and resources we need to innovate? How do we want to manage the innovation process? What do we want to innovate?Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms 10 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU
The Where of Innovation Strategy This decision refers to the directions in which a firm searches for the resources and knowledge it needs to feed its innovation process. A first critical strategic decision concerns the depth of the firm ’s search into its existing knowl- edge base50and finding the right balance between the exploration of novelty and the exploitation of existing knowledge.51A second strategic decision involves search breadth and captures the extent to which a firm searches across multipletechnology domains. 52Although it incurs higher costs than searching extensively within a narrower set of knowledge domains,53it can enable radical innovation.54 A further strategic decision concerns the extent to which a firm uses knowledgeelements from the past or from newly created technologies. 55Knowledge from the past, which comes from the tradition of the firm or the tradition of the terri-tory in which it operates, can be a valuable resource in innovation because its use fosters increased reliability, decreased risk of retaliation, and the uniqueness of innovation. 56However, excessive reliance upon past knowledge creates the risks of path-dependence, inflexibility, and conservatism, and it can reduce a firm ’s capability to respond quickly to changing market needs.57 The How of Innovation Strategy This decision concerns the strategic approach that a firm applies in the development and exploitation of its innovations. The most important aspect is the degree of openness of the innovation process. Research on open innovation suggests that this has become a strategic priority for firms competing in high-pace, high-velocity industries to leverage both inbound and outbound flows of knowl- edge and technology to increase revenues and reduce the costs of their innovation process.58Of course, open innovation is not a “one size fits all ”strategic approach and a firm has to decide what is the right degree of openness to be applied in its innovation process.59Using
has to decide what is the right degree of openness to be applied in its innovation process.59Using open innovation means systematically relying on external sources of knowledge and technology to accelerate internal develop-ment. 60On the other hand, open innovation in the exploitation phase means sys- tematically searching for opportunities to sell proprietary technologies outside thefirm core business, through approaches such as out-licensing agreements, joint ventures, or new venture spin-offs. 61In addition to applying proprietary technol- ogies for the development of new products/services, processes, and business mod-els, this strategic approach allows the firm to gain additional monetary benefits that help increase the returns on innovation investments. 62An open strategy in the development and exploitation phases of the innovation process entails a reduction of the level of control that the firm can exert and exposes it to increased risks of appropriability and knowledge spillovers.63 The What of Innovation Strategy This refers to the different types of innovations that a firm can decide to invest in. A firm may choose to focus its efforts and resources to innovate its prod- ucts/services64or to change its business model.65Often, business model innova- tions entail changes and modification to the products/services that a firm offers.Today there is increasing understanding that business model innovation representsFamily-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU 11
a very powerful source of competitive advantage, although it requires deeper changes to established routines and mental models. Another aspect regarding the what dimension of innovation is the distinction between product/service innova- tion or process innovation.66In the former, innovation concerns changes to its offer, which are highly and immediately visible to its clients. In the latter, innova-tion concerns improvements to the processes (e.g., operations, logistics, and admin- istration), changes that are not immediately visible to its clients. This suggests that product/service innovation entails higher risks for the firm as it potentially has a direct impact on its market positioning and its identity in the eyes of its clients. Finally, the degree of change that characterizes a firm ’s innovation efforts relates to dichotomy between radical and incremental innovation. 67With radical innovation, the level of risk stemming from a departure from existing organizational routines, as well as the resource commitments that such innovation entails,68is higher as compared to incremental innovation, and this is an important consideration in FDI. Family-Driven Innovation and Competitive Advantage FDI is a matter of achieving fit among the key drivers of heterogeneity of family firms —the involved family ’swillingness ,ability as discretion , and ability as resources —and the key drivers of heterogeneity of innovation decisions —thelocus of innovation search , the approaches used to manage the innovation process , and the types of innovation in which the firm invests . Creating fit among these contingency factors is of pivotal importance to resolving the paradox in family firm innovation, unlocking the innovation potential of family firms, and allowing them to build competitive advantage. This emerges from a number of examples (from our consultancy and research experience) in both the innovation and family business fields. One ofthese is particularly illustrative of how
in both the innovation and family business fields. One ofthese is particularly illustrative of how FDI operates. A family firm that is among the worldwide leaders in vacuum technology struggled for years to implement an innovation strategy based on developing radically new products by searching for knowledge in new technology domains through a closed innovation model. This strategy was strongly supported by the Director of Corporate R&D, who convinced the Top Management Team (TMT) to invest in it. Unfortunately, this approach was largely unsuccessful and the firm suffered from a competitive disadvantage vis-à-vis its international competitors for several years. The main reason underlying this failure was the lack of alignment between the strategy and the characteristics of the family firm itself, where the ownersstrongly prioritized the pursuit of non-economic goals instead of maximizing prof- itability results. This orientation proved itself incompatible with the idea of aggres- sively investing in radical innovation, even though the TMT had initially approvedthis plan. Moreover, the firm lacked the financial resources to invest in costly and risky R&D projects due to a parsimonious approach in the management of the family capital. The family owners were also concerned about keeping control over the firm and preserving the family identity, and this had led over the years to a lack of professionalization in middle management. These resource constraints meant that the firm was unable to invest the large amounts of money needed for internally developing new knowledge in unfamiliar technology domains.Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms 12 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU
After years of disappointing innovation results, the firm ’s performance improved when, after a process of intra-family succession, the new owners reduced the importance of non-economic goals and became more oriented toward achieving strong profitability results. This was now more consistent with the radical innovation strategy that the firm considered a critical cornerstone ofsuccessfully competing against larger players in the vacuum technology industry. At the same time, the Director of Corporate R&D started to implement an open approach to managing both the development and exploitation phases of the inno- vation process. This was key to circumventing the lack of financial resources and professionalization that in the past (when the firm worked according to the closed innovation model) had continued to characterize the firm and had hindered the development of new knowledge in distant technology domains. Due to these changes, the family firm realized FDI —i.e., a close fit between the dimensions of its innovation strategy and its idiosyncratic characteristics. This resolved its innovation paradox and unlocked the potential of innovation to create competitive advantage. Some Directions for Future Research on Family-Driven Innovation In this article, we have developed an FDI model and argued that only by obtaining an appropriate fit between the family firm heterogeneity dimensions and the strategic innovation decision heterogeneity dimensions it is possible to overcome the paradox that hinders innovation in family firms and thereby unlock the innova- tion potential for competitive advantage in this particular organizational setting. Of course, more theoretical and empirical research is needed to further elaborate on this model and test our contention that FDI has a positive impacton innovation and firm performance. The FDI framework developed in this article will hopefully serve as a useful tool for scholars to further our knowledge on innovation in family firms in
serve as a useful tool for scholars to further our knowledge on innovation in family firms in an integrated and structured way. Some dimensions along which research on family-driven innovation could progress are summarizedhereinafter (a table reporting some promising research questions for a research agenda on FDI can be downloaded at the following link: <http://www.diminin. it/?p=1974>): §Fit between willingness and innovation strategy. In this area, future research should study the fit between the goals pursued by the family and the innova-tion strategy adopted by the family firm. §Fit between ability as discretion and innovation strategy .H e r es c h o l a r ss h o u l ds t u d y the fit between the mechanisms underlying family owner discretion to orientthe behavior of the family firm and the innovation strategy adopted. §Fit between ability as resources and innovation strategy . Along this dimension, future scholars should study the fit between the capabilities and resources of family owners and the innovation strategy adopted by the firm. §Fit between different dimensions of the innovation strategy in a particular family firm. Here, future research should study the fit between different dimensionsFamily-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU 13
of the innovation strategy under the effect of different contingency factors related to family firm heterogeneity. §Performance implications of the dimensions of fit . Another area ripe for future research is the impact of different dimensions of fit of the FDI model on firmand innovation performance. This would allow collecting empirical evidence for the theoretical arguments developed in this article on the value of FDI in overcoming the innovation paradox characterizing family firms and unlock- ing their innovation potential. §Temporal dynamics in FDI . Many scholars emphasize the time-variant nature of family firms and the importance of adopting a temporal perspective to under- stand family business behavior. 69To the best of our knowledge, no study has investigated how the innovation behavior of family firms changes over time. Future research should therefore attempt to understand how family businessinnovation and particularly FDI change over time. The Contributions The point we want to make in this article is that this new comprehensive frame- work that we call FDI can guide future resear ch and practice in the flourishing field of family firm innovation. The four articles in this special section illustrate the usefulnessof the FDI framework. From their own indivi dual perspectives, these four independent studies help us understand how FDI can be used to explain the mechanisms through which family firms build and sustain their competitive advantage through innovation. First, the contribution in this issue of California Management Review by Miller, Wright, Le Breton-Miller, and Scholes [ “Resources and Innovation in Family Businesses: The Janus-Face of Socio-Emotional Preferences ”] clearly points to the idiosyncrasy of goal setting in family business. Their analysis builds on a comparisonbetween socio-emotional wealth and speed of change in the environment to identify relevant dimensions for the fit of what we call the where dimensions of FDI (willingness of
relevant dimensions for the fit of what we call the where dimensions of FDI (willingness of family owners and sour ces of knowledge resources for innova- tion) and the what dimensions (ability as resource s of the family owners and types of innovation). The results of this contribution are summarized in a four-by-fourframework that clearly identifies the tensions on the resources that become relevant for each of the four quadrants depicted. Bogers, Boyd, and Hollensen [ “Managing Turbulence: Business Model Development in a Family-Owned Airline ”] follow with a single case study span- ning 60 years and illuminating the contribution of family ownership, values, and rigidities to the evolution of a business model in a sector characterized by high turbulence. In so doing, this article clearly exemplifies one of the four quadrantsdepicted in Miller et al. ’s framework and contributes to understanding the fit of thewhat dimensions (ability as resources of the family owners and types of inno- vation) and the how dimensions (ability as discretion of the family owners and approaches used to manage the innovation process) in the FDI framework. Bennedsen and Foss [ “Family Assets and Liabilities in the Innovation Process ”] employ a resource-based view of strategy to identify the evolution ofFamily-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms 14 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU
can lead competitive advantage through innovation. The integrated framework outlined in this article is useful for organizing exist- ing and future research into the intriguing topic of innovation in family firms. FDI isrelevant not only for family firms —the predominant form of business organization around the globe —but also for our general understanding of innovation processes and the mutual influences between the type of corporate governance of organizationand innovation. Notes 1. R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, “Corporate Ownership around the World, ”Journal of Finance , 54/2 (April 1999): 471-517; B. Villalonga and R. Amit, “How Are U.S. Family Firms Controlled? ”Review of Financial Studies , 22/8 (August 2009): 3047-3091. 2.“The Power of Family Dynasties, ”The Economist , April 18, 2015, <www.economist.com/news/ leaders/21648639-enduring-power-families-business-and-politics-should-trouble-believers>. 3. McKinsey & Company, “The Five Attributes of Enduring Family Businesses, ”2010, <www. mckinsey.com/insights/organization/the_five_attributes_of_enduring_family_businesses>. 4.“Studying the Economic Impact of Family Businesses —A Collection of Facts, ”Tharawat Maga- zine, 22 (May-July 2014). 5. I.C. Botero, C.D. Cruz, A. Massis, and M. Nordqvist, “Family Business Research in the European Context, ”European Journal of International Management , 9/2 (2015): 139-159.Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU 15
6.“Global Data Points, ”Family Firm Institute, 2015, <www.ffi.org/?page=globaldatapoints>. 7. E. Memili, H. Fang, J.J. Chrisman, and A. De Massis, “The Impact of Small- and Medium-Sized Family Firms on Economic Growth, ”Small Business Economics (2015), in press. DOI: 10.1007/ s11187-015-9670-0. 8. C. Banbury and W. Mitchell, “The Effect of Introducing Important Incremental Innovations on Market Share and Business Survival, ”Strategic Management Journal , 16/1 (Summer 1995): 161-182; R.J. Calantone, K. Chan, and A.S. Cui, “Decomposing Product Innovativeness and its Effects on New Product Success, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 23/5 (September 2006): 408-421. 9. R. Blundell, R. Griffiths, and J. Van Reenen, “Market Share, Market Value and Innovation in a Panel of British Manufacturing Firms, ”Review of Economic Studies , 66/3 (July 1999): 529-554. 10. “The Power of Family Dynasties,” The Economist , September 24, 2009, <www.economist.com/ node/14517406>. 11. “The World ’s Most Innovative Companies, ”Forbes , 2014, <www.forbes.com/innovative- companies/list/#page:1_sort:0_direction:asc_search:_filter:Europe_filter:All%20industries>. 12. H. Simon, Hidden Champions: Lessons from 500 of the World ’s Best Unknown Companies (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 1996). 13. J.J. Chrisman, J.H. Chua, A. De Massis, F. Frattini, and M. Wright, “The Ability and Willing- ness Paradox in Family Firm Innovation, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 32/3 (May 2015): 310-318. 14. P. Lawrence and J. Lorsch, “Differentiation and Integration in Complex Organizations, ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 12/1 (June 1967): 1-47. 15. For example see G. Ahuja, C.M. Lampert, and V. Tandon, “Moving beyond Schumpeter: Man- agement Research on the Determinants of Technological Innovation, ”Academy of Management Annals , 2/1 (2008): 1-98. 16. A. De Massis, F. Frattini, and U. Lichtenthaler, “Research on Technological Innovation in Family Firms: Present Debates and --- and U. Lichtenthaler, “Research on Technological Innovation in Family Firms: Present Debates and Future Directions,” Family Business Review , 26/1 (March 2013): 10-31; P. Duran, N. Kammerlander, M. van Essen, and T. Zellweger, “Doing More with Less: Innovation Input and Output in Family Firms, ”Academy of Management Journal ,( 2 0 1 5 )i n press. 17. For example, see J.J. Chrisman and P.C. Patel, “Variations in R&D Investments of Family and Non-Family Firms: Behavioral Agency and Myopic Loss Aversion Perspectives, ”Academy of Management Journal , 55/4 (August 2012): 976-997; L.R. Gómez-Mejía, J. Campbell, G. Martin, R.E. Hoskisson, M. Makri, and D.G. Sirmon, “Socioemotional Wealth as a Mixed Gamble: Revisiting Family Firm R&D Investments with the Behavioral Agency Model, ”Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 38/6 (November 2014): 1351-1374. 18. A. König, N. Kammerlander, and A. Enders, “The Family Innovator ’s Dilemma: How Family Influence Affects the Adoption of Discontinuous Technologies by Incumbent Firms, ”Academy of Management Review , 38/3 (July 2013): 418-441; J.J. Chrisman, H. Fang, J. Kotlar, and A. De Massis, “A Note on Family Influence and the Adoption of Discontinuous Technologies in Family Firms, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 32/3 (May 2014): 384-388. 19. J. Kotlar, A. De Massis, F. Frattini, M. Bianchi, and H. Fang, “Technology Acquisition in Family and Non-Family Firms: A Longitudinal Analysis of Spanish Manufacturing Firms, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 30/6 (November 2013): 1073-1088. 20. De Massis, Frattini, and Lichtenthaler, op. cit. 21. The involvement of family owners in management results in unique resources and capabilities (e.g., E. Gedajlovic and M. Carney, “Markets, Hierarchies, and Families: Toward a Transaction Cost Theory of the Family Firm, ”Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 34/6 (November 2010): 1145-1172). Different types of controlling owners may have different investment horizons, riskaversion,
Different types of controlling owners may have different investment horizons, riskaversion, diversification plans, return aspirations, and governance structures, which are likely toaffect innovation activities and outcomes (see, e.g., R.E. Hoskisson, M.A. Hitt, R.A. Johnson, and W. Grossman, “Conflicting Voices: The Effects of Institutional Ownership Heterogeneity and Internal Governance on Corporate Innovation Strategies, ”Academy of Management Journal , 45/4 (August 2002): 697-716). For instance, the pursuit of non-economic goals may reduce theirwillingness to undertake collaborative innovation projects (Kotlar, De Massis, Frattini, Bianchi, and Fang, op. cit.). Moreover, family involvement in ownership, management, and governancecan result in developing unique resources that can then be leveraged in ways that affect innova-tion. For example, the unique characteristics of the social capital of family firms can affect their ability to use external knowledge sources during the innovation process or adopt functional structures rather than cross-functional teams to organize the innovation process (A. De Massis,Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms 16 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU
F. Frattini, E. Pizzurno, and L. Cassia, “Product Innovation in Family versus Non-Family Firms: an Exploratory Analysis, ”Journal of Small Business Management , 53/1 (January 2015): 1-36. 22. See, e.g., Kotlar, De Massis, Frattini, Bianchi, and Fang, op. cit. 23. Literature on family business innovation is largely consistent in showing that family firms invest less in R&D than non-family firms (see, e.g., J.H. Block, “R&D Investments in Family and Founder Firms: An Agency Perspective,” Journal of Business Venturing , 27/2 (March 2002): 248-265). However, due to their long-term orientation, the variability of R&D invest-ments is greater in family firms (Chrisman and Patel, op. cit.). A notable exception is Asaba ’s study (S. Asaba, “Patient Investment of Family Firms in the Japanese Electric Machinery Industry, ”Asia Pacific Journal of Management , 30/3 (September 2013): 697-715, DOI: 10.1007/s10490-012-9319-3) showing that family firms tend to invest more than their coun-terparts when financial factors and environmental uncertainty are controlled. Moreover,Sciascia and colleagues (S. Sciascia, M. Nordqvist, P. Mazzola, and A. De Massis, “Family Own- ership and R&D Intensity in Small and Medium-Sized Firms, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 32/3 (May 2015): 349-360, DOI: 10.1111/jpim.12204) show that in SMEs, the relationship between family ownership and R&D intensity is contingent on the way the familyinvests its wealth. Family ownership is a negative correlate of R&D intensity when family wealth and firm equity overlap is high, implying that the more a family controls firm owner- ship, the less the SME is inclined to invest in R&D. Conversely, if the portion of family wealthinvested in the firm is low, cautious behavior is replaced by a more innovative attitude result-ing in higher R&D expenditure. 24. Regarding the impact of family involvement on innovation activities, De Massis and colleagues (De Massis, Frattini, Pizzurno, and Cassia, op. cit.) analyze
activities, De Massis and colleagues (De Massis, Frattini, Pizzurno, and Cassia, op. cit.) analyze how and why the anatomy of theproduct innovation process differs between family and non-family firms. The analysis showsthat due to their distinctive characteristics, family businesses differ with regard to product innovation strategies and organization of the innovation process. For instance, family firms use a functional organization in the innovation process, with high levels of decisional auton-omy given to project leaders. Throughout this process, they rely on a higher number of collab- orations with universities and public research centers, while the organizational climate is largely informal and unstructured. Conversely, non-family firms predominantly establishcross-functional teams to carry out these projects, with limited delegation of decisional author-ity to project leaders and a highly structured and formalized organizational climate. Kotlar and colleagues (J. Kotlar, A. De Massis, H. Fang, and F. Frattini, “Strategic Reference Points in Family Firms, ”Small Business Economics , 43/3 (October 2014): 597-619; J. Kotlar, A. De Massis, H. Fang, and F. Frattini, “Profitability Goals, Control Goals, and the R&D Investment Decisions of Family and Non-Family Firms, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 31/6 (November 2014): 1128-1145) offer other examples of studies on how family involvement affects innova- tion activities. 25. Concerning how family involvement affects innovation outputs, the findings from existing research are controversial. Some studies show that family involvement is negatively associatedwith the quantity and quality of patents obtained (e.g., C.L. Chin, Y.J. Chen, G. Kleinman, andP. Lee, “Corporate Ownership Structure and Innovation: Evidence from Taiwan ’s Electronics Industry, ”Journal of Accounting Auditing Finance , 24/1 (January 2009): 145-175) while others show that family involvement positively affects innovation outputs (e.g.,
145-175) while others show that family involvement positively affects innovation outputs (e.g., P. Westhead, “Ambi- tions, External Environment and Strategic Factor Differences between Family and Non-FamilyCompanies, ”Entrepreneurship & Regional Development , 9/2 (1997): 127-158). 26. See Chrisman, Chua, De Massis, Frattini, and Wright, op. cit. 27. J. West and M. Bogers, “Leveraging External Sources of Innovation: A Review of Research on Open Innovation, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 31/4 (July 2014): 814-831. 28. See here H. Chesbrough, W. Vanhaverbecke, and J. West, New Frontiers in Open Innovation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014); E. Huizingh, “Open Innovation: State of the Art and Future Perspectives, ”Technovation , 31/1 (January 2011): 2-9. 29. L.R. Gómez-Mejía, K.T. Haynes, M. Núñez-Nickel, K.J.L. Jacobson, and J. Moyano-Fuentes, “Socioemotional Wealth and Business Risks in Family-Controlled Firms: Evidence from Spanish Olive Oil Mills, ”Administrative Science Quarterly ,  52/1 (March 2007): 106-137. 30. E. Almirall and R. Casadesus-Masanell, “Open Versus Closed Innovation: A Model of Discov- ery and Divergence, ”Academy of Management Review , 35/1 (January 2010): 27-47. 31. P.C. Patel and J.O. Fiet, “Knowledge Combination and the Potential Advantages of Family Firms in Searching for Opportunities, ”Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 35/6 (November 2011): 1179-1197.Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU 17
32. Kotlar, De Massis, Frattini, Bianchi, and Fang, op. cit. 33. T.H. Hannan and J.M. McDowell, “The Determinants of Technology Adoption: The Case of the Banking Firm, ”The RAND Journal of Economics , 15/3 (Autumn 1984): 328-335. 34. R.S. Burt, “Social Contagion and Innovation: Cohesion versus Structural Equivalence, ” The American Journal of Sociology , 92/6 (1987): 1287-1335. 35. Recent research (A. König, N. Kammerlander, and A. Enders, “The Family Innovator ’s Dilemma: How Family Influence Affects the Adoption of Discontinuous Technologies byIncumbent Firms, ”Academy of Management Review , 38/3 (July 2013): 418-441) suggests that family firms adopt discontinuous innovations later than their non-family counterparts, butwhen they decide to adopt them, implementation and integration happen more rapidly. 36. Lawrence and Lorsch, op. cit.37. In introducing the concepts of willingness ,ability as discretion , and ability as resources , we build on De Massis and colleagues ’conceptualization of willingness and ability [A. De Massis, J. Kotlar, J.H. Chua, and J.J. Chrisman, “Ability and Willingness as Sufficiency Conditions for Family- Oriented Particularistic Behavior: Implications for Theory and Empirical Studies, ”Journal of Small Business Management , 52/2 (2014): 344-364] and claim that explicitly considering willing- ness and ability and taking into account their varying degrees in family firms enables arriving at a good understanding of the heterogeneity of family firms. It should be noted that De Massis and colleagues in their study recognize the existence of a resource-based component of ability,but only address ability as discretion. 38. J.J. Chrisman, J.H. Chua, A.W. Pearson, and T. Barnett, “Family Involvement, Family Influ- ence, and Family Centered Non-Economic Goals in Small Firms, ”Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 36/2 (March 2012): 267-293; J. Kotlar and A. De Massis, “Goal Setting in Family Firms: Goal Diversity, Social Interactions, and
J. Kotlar and A. De Massis, “Goal Setting in Family Firms: Goal Diversity, Social Interactions, and Collective Commitment to Family-CenteredGoals, ”Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 37/6 (November 2013): 1263-1288. 39. De Massis, Kotlar, Chua, and Chrisman, op. cit., p. 346.40. S. Claessens, S. Djankov, and L.H. Lang “The Separation of Ownership and Control in East Asian Corporations,” Journal of Financial Economics , 58/1-2 (October/November 2000): 81-112. 41. M. Carney and E. Gedajlovic, “The Coupling of Ownership and Control and the Allocation of Financial Resources: Evidence from Hong Kong, ”Journal of Management Studies , 39/1 (January 2002): 123-146; J.W. Lorsch and E. MacIver, Pawns or Potentates: The Reality of America ’sC o r p o r a t e Boards (Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 1989). 42. J.J. Chrisman, J.H. Chua, and R.A. Litz, “Comparing the Agency Costs of Family and Non-Family Firms: Conceptual Issues and Exploratory Evidence, ”Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice ,2 8 / 4 (June 2004): 335-354. 43. S. Finkelstein and D.C. Hambrick, “Top-Management-Team Tenure and Organizational Out- comes: The Moderating Role of Managerial Discretion, ”Administrative Science Quarterly , 35/3 (September 1990): 484-503; D.C. Hambrick and S. Finkelstein, “Managerial Discretion: A Bridge between Polar Views of Organizational Outcomes, ”Research in Organizational Behavior , 9/2 (1987): 369-406. 44. J. Barney, “Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive Advantage, ”Journal of Management , 17/1 (March 1991): 99-120. 45. D.G. Sirmon and M.A. Hitt, “Managing Resources: Linking Unique Resources, Management, and Wealth Creation in Family Firms, ”Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 27/4 (Summer 2003): 339-358 46. T.G. Habbershon and M.L. Williams “A Resource-Based Framework for Assessing the Strategic Advantages of Family Firms, ”Family Business Review , 12/1 (March 1999): 1-25. 47. J. Tidd and J.R. Bessant, Managing Innovation: Integrating Technological, Market
1999): 1-25. 47. J. Tidd and J.R. Bessant, Managing Innovation: Integrating Technological, Market and Organizational Change ,5thEdition (New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2013). 48. C. Freeman, Economics of Industrial Innovation (London: Pinter Publisher, 1976). 49. G.P. Pisano, “You Need an Innovation Strategy, ”Harvard Business Review , 93/6 (June 2015): 44-54; M. Dodgson, D. Gann, and A. Salter, The Management of Technological Innovation: Strategy & Practice (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008). 50. A.S. Miner, P. Bassof, and C. Moorman, “Organizational Improvisation and Learning: A Field Study, ”Administrative Science Quarterly , 46/2 (June 2001): 304-337. 51. A.K. Gupta, K.G. Smith, and C.E. Shalley, “The Interplay between Exploration and Exploitation, ” Academy of Management Journal , 49/4 (August 2006): 693-706. 52. R. Katila and G. Ahuja, “Something Old, Something New: A Longitudinal Study of Search Behavior and New Product Introduction, ”Academy of Management Journal , 45/6 (December 2002): 1183-1194.Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms 18 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU
53. K. Laursen and A. Salter, “Open for Innovation: The Role of Openness in Explaining Innovation Performance among UK Manufacturing Firms, ”Strategic Management Journal , 27/2 (February 2006): 131-150. 54. L. Rosenkopf and P. Almeida, “Overcoming Local Search through Alliances and Mobility, ” Management Science , 49/6 (June 2003): 751-766. 55. A. Nerkar, “Old is Gold? The Value of Temporal Exploration in the Creation of New Knowledge, ” Management Science , 49/2 (February 2003): 211-229. 56. R. Katila, “New Product Search over Time, Past Ideas in Their Prime? ”Academy of Management Journal , 45/5 (October 2002): 995-1010. 57. D.N. Barron, E. West, and M.T. Hannan, “A Time to Grow and a Time to Die: Growth and Mortality of Credit Unions in New York City, 1914-1990, ”American Journal of Sociology 100/2 (1994): 381-421. 58. J. West and M. Bogers, “Leveraging External Sources of Innovation: A Review of Research on Open Innovation, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 31/4 (July 2013): 814-831. 59. V. Lazzarotti and R. Manzini, “Different Modes of Open Innovation: a Theoretical Framework and an Empirical Study, ”International Journal of Innovation Management , 13/4 (December 2009): 615-636. 60. V. Parida, M. Westerberg, and J. Frishammar, “Inbound Open Innovation Activities in High- Tech SMEs: The Impact on Innovation Performance, ”Journal of Small Business Management , 50/2 (April 2012): 283-309. 61. A. Di Minin, F. Frattini, and A. Piccaluga, “Fiat: Open Innovation in a Downturn (1993- 2003), ”California Management Review , 52/3 (Spring 2010): 132-159. 62. M. Bianchi, V. Chiesa, and F. Frattini, “Selling Technological Knowledge: Managing The Com- plexities of Technology Transactions,” Research-Technology Management , 54/2 (March/April 2011): 18-26. 63. A. Hoecht and P. Trott, “Trust Risk and Control in the Management of Collaborative Technol- ogy Development, ”International Journal of Innovation Management , 3/3 (September 1999): 257-270; D. Chiaroni, V. --- ”International Journal of Innovation Management , 3/3 (September 1999): 257-270; D. Chiaroni, V. Chiesa, and F. Frattini, “The Open Innovation Journey: How Firms Dynamically Implement the Emerging Innovation Management Paradigm, ”Technovation, 31/1 (January 2011): 34-43. 64. H. Ernst, “Success Factors of New Product Development: A Review of Empirical Literature, ” International Journal of Management Reviews , 4/1 (March 2002): 1-40. 65. H. Chesbrough, “Business Model Innovation: Opportunities and Barriers, ”Long Range Planning , 43/2-3 (April 2010): 354-363. 66. J. Utterback and W.J. Abernathy, “A Dynamic Model of Process and Product Innovation, ” Omega , 3/6 (December 1975): 639-656. 67. M. McDermott and G. Colarelli O ’Connor, “Managing Radical Innovation: An Overview of Emergent Strategy Issues, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 19/6 (November 2003): 424-438. 68. R. Veryzer, “Discontinuous Innovation and the New Product Development Process, ”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 15/4 (July 1998): 304-321. 69. M. Gagné, P. Sharma, and A. De Massis, “The Study of Organizational Behavior in Family Business, ”European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology , 23/5 (2014): 643-656; P. Sharma, C. Salvato, and T. Reay, “Temporal Dimensions of Family Enterprise Research,” Family Business Review , 27/1 (2014): 10-19; P. Sharma, A. De Massis, and M. Gagné, “Family Business: A Fertile Ground for Research on Time, Teams, and Positive Organizational Study, ” European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology , 23/5 (2014): 674-679. California Management Review , Vol. 58, No. 1, pp. 5 –19. ISSN 0008-1256, eISSN 2162-8564. © 2015 by The Regents of the University of California. All rights reserved. Request permission to photocopy or reproduce article content at the University of California Press ’s Reprints and Permissions web page, http://www.ucpress.edu/journals.php?p=reprints, or via email: jpermissions@ucpress.edu. DOI: 10.1525/
or via email: jpermissions@ucpress.edu. DOI: 10.1525/ cmr.2015.58.1.5.Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 58, NO. 1 FALL 2015 CMR.BERKELEY.EDU 19
En el artículo "Family-Driven Innovation: Resolving the Paradox in Family Firms", se presenta la perspectiva de la innovación impulsada por la familia en empresas familiares. Se destaca la importancia de alinear las decisiones estratégicas de innovación con las características únicas de cada empresa familiar para lograr y mantener una ventaja competitiva a través de la innovación. Se menciona que las empresas familiares son la forma de organización empresarial más común a nivel mundial y que su influencia perdurable en los negocios y la sociedad es esencial para cualquier economía global. Se señala que las empresas familiares representan una gran parte de las empresas privadas, generan una parte significativa del PIB nacional y emplean a una gran proporción de la fuerza laboral en muchos países.

El artículo destaca que, a pesar de la percepción convencional de que las empresas familiares son conservadoras y menos innovadoras que otros tipos de organizaciones, las estadísticas muestran que los propietarios familiares controlan una gran proporción de las empresas más innovadoras en Europa. Se menciona el caso de las empresas familiares Mittelstand en Alemania, reconocidas internacionalmente por su innovación. Se destaca la importancia de comprender el comportamiento distintivo de las empresas familiares en la economía global y se plantea la necesidad de alinear las decisiones estratégicas de innovación con las características únicas de cada empresa familiar para lograr una ventaja competitiva sostenible.

En resumen, el artículo ofrece una visión integral y contingente sobre la innovación en empresas familiares, destacando la importancia de la innovación impulsada por la familia para resolver la paradoja en la innovación de estas empresas y lograr un éxito sostenible en un entorno empresarial cada vez más competitivo.
