Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Research Policy journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/respol Catching up or lagging behind? The long-term business and innovation potential of subsidized start-ups out of unemployment☆ Marco Caliendo⁎,a,c, Steffen Künnb,c, Martin Weissenbergerd aUniversityofPotsdam,DIWBerlin,andIABNuremberg,Germany bMaastrichtUniversityandROA,theNetherlands cIZABonn,Germany dUniversityofPotsdam,Germany ARTICLE INFO Keywords: EntrepreneurshipStart-up subsidies Business growth InnovationJob creation JELclassification: L26 M13 J68ABSTRACT Fromanactivelabormarketpolicyperspective,start-upsubsidiesforunemployedindividualsareveryeffectivein improving long-term labor market outcomes for participants. From a business perspective, however, the assess- mentofthesepublicprogramsislessclearsincetheymightattractindividualswithlowentrepreneurialabilities and produce businesses with low survival rates and little contribution to job creation, economic growth, and innovation.Inthispaper,weusearichdatasettocompareparticipantsofaGermanstart-upsubsidyprogram for unemployed individuals to a group of regular founders who started from non-unemployment and did notreceivethesubsidy.Thedataallowsustoanalyzetheirbusinessperformanceupuntil40monthsafterbusiness formation. We find that formerly subsidized founders lag behind not only in survival and job creation, but especially also in innovation activities. The gaps in these business outcomes are relatively constant or evenwidening over time. Hence, we do not see any indication of catching up in the longer run. While the gap in survivalcanbeentirelyexplainedbyinitialdifferencesinobservablestart-upcharacteristics,thegapinbusiness development remains and seems to be the result of restricted access to capital as well as differential
remains and seems to be the result of restricted access to capital as well as differential businessstrategiesanddynamics.ConsideringtheseconflictingresultsfortheassessmentofthesubsidyprogramfromanALMPandbusinessperspective,policymakersneedtocarefullyweighthecostsandbenefitsofsuchastrategyto find the right policy mix. 1. Introduction Thecurrent debateintheentrepreneurship literaturequestionsthe common wisdom that an increase in start-up activities automatically results in economic and employment growth (see, e.g., Colombellietal.,2016).Ithasbeenwelldocumentedthatamongthose new businesses who start, many fail, and among those who survive, onlyasmallfractionintroducesnewinnovationsandspurssustainable employment growth. As a consequence, the academic as well as poli- ticaldiscussionhasshiftedfromthe quantitytothequalityofstart-ups.In this context, the question arises as to whether existing policies pro- moting a broad entry into entrepreneurship are effective or should ra- ther be targeted towards the stimulation of innovative start-ups (Acs et al., 2016; Lerner, 2010; Shane, 2009). In this light, particularly the promotionofstart-upsoutofunemploymentaresuspectedofproducing onlymarginalbusinesses thatdo nothaveany significantcontribution to productivity, innovation, and economic growth. The major concern with start-up subsidies in general is based on an occupational choice model predicting an adverse selection where the subsidy attracts less ableindividualstoentrepreneurshipduetoloweropportunitycostsand https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2020.104053 Received 15 June 2020; Accepted 15 June 2020☆The authors thank Alessandra Colombelli, Alexander Kritikos, Lutz Bellmann, Stefan Tübbicke, the guest editors and three anonymous reviewers for helpful commentsandsuggestions.WefurtherthanktheInstituteofEmploymentResearch(IAB)forcooperationandinstitutionalsupportwithintheresearchproject1755. Marco Caliendo is grateful for financial support from the German Research Foundation
Marco Caliendo is grateful for financial support from the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG, project number: 407087322). A Supplementary Appendix is available online at 10.1016/j.respol.2020.104053. ⁎Corresponding author at: University of Potsdam, Chair of Empirical Economics, August-Bebel-Str. 89, 14482 Potsdam, Germany. E-mailaddresses: caliendo@uni-potsdam.de (M. Caliendo), s.kuenn@maastrichtuniversity.nl (S. Künn), weissenberger@empwifo.uni-potsdam.de (M. Weissenberger).Research Policy 49 (2020) 104053 Available online 10 July 2020 0048-7333/ © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. T
reduced entry barriers (self-selection view, see Hvide and Møen, 2007; Nanda, 2008).1This might be even more pronounced if the subsidy is specificallytargetedtowardsunemployedindividualswhoalreadyface more severe restrictions with respect to the availability or access to human, social and financial capital (Agarwal and Shah, 2014; Autio etal.,2014;Caliendoetal.,2015b).Asaconsequence,subsidizedstart- upscanbeexpectedtounderperformfroma businessperspective.Thisis particularly a concern if subsidized businesses additionally crowd out incumbent firms or regular start-ups due to their temporary artificial cost advantages (see, e.g., Meager, 1996; Santarelli and Vivarelli, 2007).Therefore,theentrepreneurshipliteraturesuggestsarethinkingoftheconceptofstart-upsubsidiesfortheunemployedduetothehigh costs involved. For instance, financial resources might be used instead to support innovative start-ups or shaping local innovation systems triggering entrepreneurial activities with high growth potential (Colombellietal.,2016;Congregadoetal.,2010;Lerner,2010;Román et al., 2013; Santarelli and Vivarelli, 2007). Albeit this critical view of the entrepreneurship literature on start- up subsidies, many industrialized countries offer financial support to unemployed individuals encouraging them to start their own busi- nesses,andhencetoescapeunemployment,aspartoftheiractivelabor marketpolicy(ALMP).Thesubsidiesareexpectedtoremove,reduceor compensate for disadvantages unemployed founders face in human, financial and/or social capital as compared to non-unemployed foun- dersandactasamechanismtoinsurethemagainsttheriskofloworno income during the initial start-up phase. A large body of empirical evidence shows the effectiveness of start-up subsidies to sustainably integrateformerlyunemployedindividualsinto(self-)employmentand improvetheirearningprofiles(see Caliendo,2016,foranoverview).As a consequence, the policy can be considered highly effective on theindividual level from an ALMP
a consequence, the policy can be considered highly effective on theindividual level from an ALMP perspective, most likely explaining the intensive use of this policy by many industrialized countries. While strong evidence exists supporting the ALMP perspective, empirical results for start-up subsidies for the unemployed on the business perspective are very scarce. Using aggregate data on public expenditures on start-up subsidies, Millán et al. (2012) and Román et al. (2013) show a positive impact on business survival and negative evidence with respect to employment growth among sub- sidized start-ups out of unemployment. Based on individual data, AnderssonandWadensjö(2007) andCaliendoetal.(2015b) providea comparison between subsidized and non-subsidized start-ups out ofunemployment. Both studies find opposing results and face severe re- strictions limiting the validity of the findings. On the one hand, Andersson and Wadensjö (2007) shows better performance of sub- sidized start-ups but it remains unclear whether this finding reflects acream-skimming selection effect. On the other hand, Caliendo et al. (2015b) provide indeed support for the low-growth hypothesis among subsidized start-ups out of unemployment but has the limitation that the result is likely to be influenced by the subsidy payment itself, which expired only a few months before measurement oftheoutcomes.Mostimportantly,neitherofthesestudieswasableto lookattheinnovativebehaviourofstart-upsoutofunemploymentina long-term perspective. To contribute to this debate and fill this research gap, our paper provides a comparison up to 40 months after business formation be- tween subsidized start-ups out of unemployment and non-subsidized start-ups out of non-unemployment in Germany in terms of various business outcomes, such as employment growth, business expansion and innovative behaviour. Individuals in both groups started theirbusinesses inthe first quarterof2009. The subsidized businesses werestarted out of
started theirbusinesses inthe first quarterof2009. The subsidized businesses werestarted out of unemployment and received the “Gründungszuschuss,” whichconsistsofamonthlypaymentequivalenttotheindividual’slastunemploymentbenefitplusalumpsumof€300tocoversocialsecurity costsforaninitialperiodof9monthsandthepossibilitytoextendthe lump-sum payment for another six months. Germany is exceptionally suited for this analysis because policies promoting entrepreneurship amongunemployedindividualshavealongtraditiongoingbacktothe introduction of the bridging allowance in 1986 (see Caliendo and Kritikos,2010,formoredetails).Furthermore,thescaleofsuchpolicies in Germany has been considerable, accounting for roughly between 40% and 60% of all full-time start-ups in Germany between 2006 and 2011 (Caliendo et al., 2015b). 2In this sense, our study is also a con- tribution to the examination of “everyday entrepreneurship” in thespiritofWelteretal.(2017).Thedatasetisalongitudinalextensionof thedatausedby Caliendoetal.(2015b) andcontainsnotonlydetailed information on an extensive list of start-up characteristics but also in- cludes business performance measures in various dimensions, thus al- lowing for an in-depth analysis of business development over time. Based on this data set, we provide evidence on the following as- pects: First, we investigate whether initially subsidized businesses can successfullysurviveandthriveinthemarketevenwhenthesubsidyhad expiredmorethantwoyearsearlier.Second,wecomparethebusiness performance as reflected by income, job creation, and investment ac- tivitybetweenformerlysubsidizedandregularlyfoundedbusinesses40 months after business formation. Third, we are the first to provide evidence on innovative behaviour of subsidized start-ups from un- employment in a long-term perspective and in comparison to regular start-ups. And fourth, we further investigate possible reasons for the persistentgapsintheseoutcomesbetweenthetwogroups.Wefindthat 40 months after
reasons for the persistentgapsintheseoutcomesbetweenthetwogroups.Wefindthat 40 months after start-up, formerly subsidized founders lag behind regularbusinessesintermsofallobservedbusinessoutcomes.Thegap in business survival can entirely be explained by initial differences inobservable start-up characteristics (such as personal characteristics, business sector, and start-up capital), while the remaining gaps seem mainly to be driven by restricted access to capital and differences in business strategies and dynamics. Theremainderofthispaperisorganizedasfollows:In Section2,we provideatheoreticalfoundationforourempiricalanalysis.In Section3, wepresenttheinstitutionalsettingsofthestart-upsubsidy,describethedata as well as the estimation sample, and discuss panel attrition. Fol- lowing that, in the empirical part, we compare the business develop- mentsandperformancesbetweenthetwogroups(Section4)beforewe explore reasons for the revealed differences (Section 5). After that,we summarize our findings and discuss policy implications in Section 6. 2. Theoretical considerations TheaimofthisSectionistoprovideatheoreticalfoundationforthe paper.Therefore,westartwithadiscussionofstart-upsubsidiesforthe unemployedfromanALMPperspective.Thisincludesthepresentation ofthemainideaandreasoningbehindsuchsubsidiesandalsoincludes abriefsummaryontheireffectivenesswithrespecttotheintegrationof unemployed job seekers into the labor market. In a second step, we discussexpectationswithrespecttothedevelopmentofthesubsidized start-ups from a business perspective. We focus on economic con- siderations of potential mechanisms triggered by such a subsidy (ad- verseselectionormoralhazard),addressthekeyroleofstartingoutof unemployment (knowledge context), and discuss how this potentially affects business development. 1The competing experimentation view claims that individuals only have in- complete information about their entrepreneurial abilities ex ante and learn about them as they operate their
about their entrepreneurial abilities ex ante and learn about them as they operate their businesses (Hombert et al.,2014; Jovanovic, 1982).Thesubsidythuslowersentrybarriersformoreconstrainedindividuals but does not induce a negative selection.2The importance of the start-up subsidy program in Germany has sharply declined as the result of a restrictive reform at the end of 2011 (seeBellmann et al.,2018, for details).M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 2
2.1. Start-upsubsidiesfromanALMPperspective The main aim of ALMP is to assist unemployed individuals during job search by removing existing disadvantages in education, work ex- perienceorproductivitypreventingatransitiontoemployment.Inthis context, a start-up subsidy is a financial support to unemployed job seekers in order to enable them to start their own business and hence escape unemployment. The existence of start-up subsidies for the un- employed relies on the assumption that nascent entrepreneurs among the unemployed face disadvantages compared to regular business founders.Suchdisadvantagesmightexistindifferentdimensions.First, the unemployed are likely to face financial constraints with respect to access to capital compared to the non-unemployed population: They tendtohavelowerfinancialmeans(personallyandwithinfamily),and are likely to face severe credit constraints3as well as being dis- criminated by capital markets (see Meager, 1996; Perry, 2006).4 Second,unemployedindividualsmightfaceaknowledgeshortageora depreciation of their start-up specific human and social capital during unemployment(PfeifferandReize,2000).Thisparticularlyincludesthe lack of experience and knowledge with respect to markets, operations and technology, which are all driving innovation (Agarwal and Shah, 2014;Autioetal.,2014).Moreover,thelackofemploymentexperience also induces disadvantages in terms of business and social networks, i.e., contact to potential customers, business partners, or knowledge spillovers from colleagues (Niefert, 2010). Third, due to imperfect in- formation, unemployed individuals primarily focus on dependent em- ploymentandtendtoignoreself-employment(Storey,2003,referstoit as “lack-of-awareness”).5Finally, start-ups out of unemployment are more likely necessity start-ups. Unemployed individuals decide to be-comeself-employedowingtomissingemploymentalternatives.In this context,Shane (2003) argues that unemployed individuals have less access to information
this context,Shane (2003) argues that unemployed individuals have less access to information concerning business opportunities and lower opportunity costs, and consequently, they also realize less valuable businessideas,introducelessinnovationandhenceearnsmallerprofits. The start-up subsidy aims at removing such barriers for the un- employed by providing financial assistance. Nascent unemployed en- trepreneurs are expected to have fewer resources available – than regular business founders – to prepare the business start-up. The sub- sidyisexpectedtocompensateforthesedisadvantages.Moreover,ina recentstudy BianchiandBobba(2013) showthatinsurance(insteadof credit) constraints are mostly binding for nascent entrepreneurs, i.e.,the (financial) risk of failure hinders nascent entrepreneurs. In this sense,thesubsidycanbeconsideredtoactasamechanismtoinsurethe unemployed against the risk of low or no income during the start-up period, stimulating nascent entrepreneurs among the unemployed to start a business. However, paying a subsidy is also vulnerable to deadweight effects in the sense that it could be exploited by nascent entrepreneurs who would start a business even without the subsidy. Caliendo (2016) summarizes a large number of empirical studies on such schemes in different countries such as Australia, Finland, France,Germany, New Zealand, Romania, Sweden, the UK and the US (basedonBehrenz et al., 2016; Caliendo and Künn, 2011; Caliendo et al., 2016; Duhautois et al., 2015; O’Leary, 1999; Rodriguez-Planas and Jacob, 2010; Wolff et al., 2016, amongst others). While the key prin- cipleofthesubsidiesisverysimilaracrosscountries,theydifferinsome institutional settings such as amount, duration, and eligibility criteria andalsointhewayhowsuccessismeasured.Themostcommonsuccess measure is the survival rate; others include re-integration of un- employed workers into the labor market, income, the contribution to growth and job creation, and deadweight effects. Most studies
market, income, the contribution to growth and job creation, and deadweight effects. Most studies focus only on a few dimensions, and most are descriptive rather than causal studies.Overall,thecausalstudiesconfirmtheeffectivenessofstart-up subsidiestosustainablyintegrateformerlyunemployedindividualsinto (self-)employmentandimprovetheirearningprofiles.Moreover,ithas been shown that deadweight effects occur, but at a much lower scale thangenerallyexpected(CaliendoandKritikos,2010).Hence,intotalit can be concluded that start-up subsidies can be considered successful from an ALMP perspective. 2.2. Start-upsubisidesfromabusinessperspective However, offering a subsidy might trigger some negative ex- ternalities such as adverse selection and moral hazard. Adverse selec- tion occurs because the subsidy reduces the costs for entering self-em- ployment, allowing less able individuals to self-select into entrepreneurship. Nanda(2008) andHvideandMøen(2007) showthat reducing liquidity constraints drives adverse selection into en-trepreneurship, and Millán et al. (2014a) andMillán et al. (2014b) show that starting self-employment from unemployment increases therisk of re-entering unemployment. They conclude that subsidies for unemployed job seekers might contribute to an adverse selection pro- blem. 6In addition to adverse selection, the subsidy payment might induce moral hazard, predicting that individuals reduce their effortduringsubsidyreceiptasthey–incontrasttonon-subsidizedbusinesses – do not have to take the cost, i.e., the risk of no or low income. 7The negative externalities can be expected to be even more pronounced ifthe subsidy is specifically targeted towards unemployed individuals whoalreadyfacemoresevererestrictionswithrespecttohuman,social and financial capital (as discussed above). In addition, the entrepreneurship literature has recently began to discuss the importance of the “knowledge context”, from which start- ups occur, for innovation and growth (see
importance of the “knowledge context”, from which start- ups occur, for innovation and growth (see Agarwal and Shah, 2014; Autio et al., 2014). The literature differentiates between employee, academic and user entrepreneurship. Employees can build on knowl- edge gained from firm environment on technology, markets and op- erations. This can be turned into innovative entrepreneurship. Aca- demics rely on scientific knowledge to introduce product innovation, andusersofexistingcommercialproductsexploittheiruserknowledge to innovate new features or functionalities. In any case, the context from which start-ups are realized plays a key role in determining in- novativeentrepreneurshipandgrowth.Inthisregard,itcanbeargued that unemployed job seekers start, on average, from a weaker knowl- edge context – in contrast to non-subsidized business start-ups – be- cause they are neither employed nor associated with an academic in- stitution. The weaker context and the resulting lack of knowledge predicts lower innovation and growth trajectories. Given the potential occurrence of negative externalities (adverse3Generalevidenceonhowcreditconstraintsrestrictthestart-upratecanbe found in Evans and Jovanovic (1989), Holtz-Eakin et al. (1994) and Schäfer et al. (2011). 4For instance, unemployed individuals are more likely to have bad debt re- cords, less wealth and less human capital, thus reducing their probability of receiving credit. Banks tend to screen individuals with respect to their human capital in the sense that it is negatively correlated with credit default risk,which renders individuals with higher human capital more capable and thusbetter access to credit. 5The experience of labor market failure due to job loss reduces individuals self-confidence, making them less likely to consider self-employment as an al-ternative to dependent employment (Bönte and Jarosch (2011) show that personality influences the decision to become self-employed andCaliendo et al. (2015a) highlight
personality influences the decision to become self-employed andCaliendo et al. (2015a) highlight important gender differences in this regard).6In a different context, Román et al. (2011) also show how the existence of publicpolicies,i.e.employmentprotection,mightleadtoadverseselectionintoentrepreneurship. 7Thisreliesontheexistenceofasymmetricinformation,i.e.individualswho applyforthesubsidyhavemoreinformationthantheinstitutionthatpaysthesubsidy. Once the subsidy is approved, the institution has no influence on the effortof the applicant. See Paulsonet al. (2006) asan examplefor how moral hazard induces financial constraints on start-ups.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 3
selection,moralhazard)astriggeredbythesubsidypayment,aswellas thedisadvantagedstartingconditionsfacedbyunemployedindividuals (weaker knowledge context), it is likely that subsidized unemployed business founders start marginal businesses that do not have any sig- nificant contribution to productivity, innovation, or economic growth (Acs et al., 2016; Shane, 2009). Empirical support on this hypothesis is very scarce. Using data on EU-15 countries, Millán et al. (2012) find that higher national public expendituresonstart-upsubsidiesforunemployedindividualsdecreaseexit rates for self-employed individuals who had entered self-employ- ment from unemployment. They conclude that overall the subsidies might not only increase entry into self-employment but also equalize business survival chances of formerly unemployed and formerly non- unemployedbusinessfounders.Inarelatedstudy, Románetal.(2013) findthathighernationalsubsidyexpendituresincreasetransitionsfromunemployment to solopreneurship but do not affect transitions to new businesses with additional job creation, emphasizing the low growth potentialsofsubsidizedbusinessesoutofunemployment.Bothofthese studiesarebasedonmacroindicatorsforstart-upsubsidyexpenditures onanationallevelandthusindirectlyalsoreflectcross-countryeffects. The empirical evidence basedon puremicro data iseven more scarce. Andersson and Wadensjö (2007) find that in Sweden individuals en- tering entrepreneurship from unemployment with a subsidy performbetter than unemployed individuals not receiving thesubsidy in terms of income and, to a lesser extent, with respect to hiring employees, conditional on a small set of basic controls. But they perform worse than formerly dependently employed founders. It remains unclear, however, whether this finding reflects the subsidy effect of additional helporacream-skimmingselectioneffectwherecaseworkersapprove those candidates for subsidy receipt who display the highest en- trepreneurial potential. There is in
candidates for subsidy receipt who display the highest en- trepreneurial potential. There is in principle so far only one study, by Caliendoetal.(2015b),thatdirectlycomparessubsidizedstart-upsoutof unemployment with regular start-ups (non-subsidized out of non- unemployment) in various dimensions of success including two objec- tivemeasuresforinnovativebehaviour.Theycreatedauniquedataset comprising representative samples of male participants in a German start-up subsidy and male regular founders that allows for a compre- hensive and in-depth comparison. The empirical findings support the theoretical arguments above, i.e., subsidized businesses lag behind in business growth and innovation 19 months after business formation. However, the results have to be interpreted with caution as they are likely still influenced by the subsidy itself, which expired only a few months before the survey. Therefore, the question remains as to whe- ther the initial differences in business outcomes compared to regular founders persist (or even grow), or whether subsidized businesses can catch up in the medium- and long-run. On the one hand, it can be ar- gued that the initial disadvantages for subsidized business founders resultinlowerinitialinnovationandgrowthintentionsandappropriate business strategies, which negatively affect long-term business out- comes, leading to persisting or widening gaps. On the other hand, it mightbethecasethat survivingsubsidizedbusinessescatchuponcethe subsidyhasfullyexpiredandallbusinesseswereequallyexposedtofullmarket mechanisms. 3. Institutional details and data 3.1. Institutionaldetails The subsidized founders in our sample received the “Gründungszuschuss” (start-up subsidy, SUS), which was initially in- troduced in August 2006 in Germany. 8In order to be eligible for thesubsidy,unemployedindividualshadtohaveaminimumentitlementto unemploymentbenefitI9ofatleast90daysatthetimeofprogramentry. Moreover, individuals applying for the SUS had to provide a
Moreover, individuals applying for the SUS had to provide a businessand financing plan to the Employment Agency that also had to be evaluated by a competent external institution. If all requirements were fulfilled, SUS was paid for a maximum duration of 15 months, with the subsidy comprising of two parts: During the first nine months after business start-up, an amount equivalent to the individual’s last unemployment benefit and a lump sum of € 300 to cover social security costs was paid monthly. 10After nine months, individuals could apply for an optional second period toreceive the lump sum of € 300 for another six months. While the first period of SUS could be legally claimed by all individuals who fulfilled alllegalrequirements,thefoundershadtoapplyforthesecondperiod by showing that their businesses are sufficiently economically active and having a sustainable plan for the following months. Therefore, foundershadtosubmitformalproofssuchasbusinessreportsincluding financial statements for the first six months, a detailed description of business activities and customer structure, and a preview on future profitability. The final assessment and decision was taken by the case- worker based on the submitted documents as well as contrasting the actualbusinessdevelopmentwithinthefirstsixmonthswiththeinitial business and financing plan (as submitted with the initial application forthesubsidy). 11Finally,itshouldbementionedthatsubsidizedstart- ups out of unemployment constituted a large share of about 40% to60% of all full-time start-ups in Germany between 2006 and 2011 (dependingontheunderlyingdatasource,see Caliendoetal.,2015b). 12 3.2. Datacreationandestimationsample Thedatasetweuseisalongitudinalextensionofatelephonesurvey whichwasinitiallycollectedby Caliendoetal.(2015b).Theycreateda unique data set that allows a comprehensive and in-depth comparison betweensubsidizedstart-upsoutofunemploymentandnon-subsidized start-ups out of non-unemployment. Based on different data
start-ups out of non-unemployment. Based on different data sources, they drew representative random samples of subsidized and non-sub- sidized founders who started a full-time business in the first quarter of 2009 in Germany. The cohort of subsidized founders consists of in- itially unemployed individuals who received the start-up subsidy from theFederalEmploymentAgency,whilenon-subsidizedstart-upsconsist of founders who were not unemployed directly prior to start-up and consequentlydidnotreceivethesubsidy(see Caliendoetal.,2015b,for details on data construction). The selected business founders were initially surveyed around 19 months after start-up (wave 1) on an extensive list of start-upcharacteristics,socio-demographics,previouslabormarketexperiences, 8Thisprogramreplaceditstwopredecessorprogramsthatessentiallydiffered intermsofsubsidylengthandamount(see Caliendoetal.,2012;Caliendoand(footnotecontinued) Kritikos, 2010, for a description). 9InGermany,everyindividualwhohasbeeninemploymentsubjecttosocial securityforatleastoneoutofthelastthreeyearsiseligibleforunemployment benefitI.Theamountofthebenefitconsistsof60%(67%withchildren)forthe lastnetwageandisbasicallypaidforamaximumperiodof12months,withthe exception of older individuals (see Caliendo and Hogenacker, 2012). 10Without program participation, the individuals would lose their un- employment benefit entitlement given that they start their own business andhence work full-time. The subsidy receipt was offset against the remainingunemployment benefit I entitlement, however. 11We find that 61.7% of the subsidized business founders in our sample re- ceived the subsidy for 15 months. Out of those without subsidy prolongation,9% reported that the application was rejected, 33% did not apply because themonthly amount of 300 Euro was not worth the administrative burden asso- ciatedwiththeapplicationprocess,18%didnotknowaboutthe prolongation and 40% reported other reasons. 12Meanwhile, a major restrictive reform of the
prolongation and 40% reported other reasons. 12Meanwhile, a major restrictive reform of the SUS at the end of 2011 has reduced SUS entry numbers substantially (see Bellmann et al., 2018, for de- tails).M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 4
intergenerational transmissions, as well as their labor market status and,conditionalontheongoingbusinessactivityoftheirinitialstart-up from the first quarter in 2009, their business performance across var- ious dimensions. Restricting the analysis to male founders, 1478 (930) valid interviews could be completed with subsidized (regular) founders,see Fig.1.Basedonthissample, Caliendoetal.(2015b) show that subsidized founders significantly lag behind regular founders in termsofincome,businessgrowth,andinnovation.Wenowhaveaccess toasecondinterviewwavewiththesameindividualsthatextendsthe observation window to 40 months after start-up (wave 2). This allows ustoanalyzethepersistenceofinitialdifferencesinbusinessoutcomes betweenthe subsidizedandnon-subsidizedmale foundersup until3.5 years after business formation. Fig. 1shows that we have 827 (453) panel observations on subsidized (regular) founders available in wave 2. 3.3. Examinationofselectivepanelattrition As in many other surveys, we find a positive panel selection (see Table B.1 in the Supplementary Appendix for details): Respondents participating in both interview waves (panel sample) are on average older, have a higher educational and professional background, had higher earnings in the past, and experienced less lifetime unemploy- ment compared to the full sample in wave 1. More importantly, the panel attrition also induces a weak selective bias in our outcome vari- ables. Table B.2 in the Supplementary Appendix shows a raw compar- isonoftheoutcomevariablesbetweenthefullandthepanelsamplefor eachsubgroupoffounders.Itcanbeseenthatwave2respondentsare onaveragemorelikelytobeself-employedandreporthigherearnings in wave 1 than the full sample. Although only the difference in unemployment shares for regular founders is statistically significant, we nevertheless decided to pre- cautionally use a weighting procedure in order to correct for selective panel attrition for two reasons: First, the low numbers of observations
to correct for selective panel attrition for two reasons: First, the low numbers of observations might reduce the power of these significance tests and lead us – in- correctly – not to reject the absence of significantly selective panel at- trition.Andsecond,while theestimatedgapsintheempiricalanalysis arenotsensitivetotheweightingprocedure,itnonethelessremovesthe small positive biases in the absolute levels of business outcomes and ensurestheirrepresentativenessfortheunderlyingpopulations.Asthe chosen correction procedure, we implement inverse probability weighting(see Wooldridge,2002).13Theweightingprocedureremoves almost all statistically significant differences in observable character-istics (see Table B.1) and reduces the differences in means for the outcomevariablesevenfurther(seeTableB.2).Therefore,theempirical analysis will rely on the weighted outcome variables.4. Empirical results Inordertoanalyzewhetherformerlysubsidizedbusinessesstilllag behind regular businesses, we compare their performances up to 40monthsafterstart-up,i.e.,morethantwoyearsafterthesubsidyhas expired.Inthefollowingempiricalanalysis,westartwithadescriptive comparison of business survival between formerly subsidized and reg- ular founders (Section 4.1). After that, we restrict our analysis to founders who are still self-employed and actively operating the same business thatwascreatedinthefirst quarterof2009andcomparethe businessperformancebetweenthetwogroupsovertime(Section4.2). 4.1. Comparisonofbusinesssurvivalandlabormarketstatus We measure business survival at the time of the interview by creating a dummy variable which is equal to one if the individual’s main employment activity is self-employment with the same business started in the first quarter of 2009, and zero otherwise. 14Table 1also reportstheshareofinitialfounderswhoreporttheirmainactivitytobedependent employment or unemployment at the time of interview. It can be seen that the survival rate significantly decreases for for-
at the time of interview. It can be seen that the survival rate significantly decreases for for- merly subsidized founders from 79.7% in wave 1 to 71.1% in wave 2, whiletheshareforregularfoundersincreasesovertimefrom71.7%to 77.9%. 15Thesedivergingdevelopmentsresultinasignificantnegative gap of 6.8%-points for subsidized founders compared to regular foun-ders 40 months after start-up. Ontheonehand,thedeclineinself-employmentshareforformerly subsidized founders might indicate that the subsidy artificially in- creased the survival rate of subsidized founders in wave 1, while in wave2marketcompetitionsortedoutlessprofitablebusinessesinline with the survival-of-the-fittest mechanism (Fritsch and Schroeter,2011).Ontheotherhand,theshareofnecessitystart-upsis generally more pronounced among formerly unemployed founders (Caliendoetal.,2015b;2020),whichmightresultinasubstantialshare offormerlysubsidizedfounderspreferringdependentemploymentover self-employment in the medium and long run. Taking a closer look at the shares of founders in dependent employment and unemployment revealsthatinwave2closeto20%offormerlysubsidizedfoundersare Fig.1.Datagenerationandsamplerestrictions. Note:Fordetailsontheconstructionofthedataset,see Section3inthetextand Caliendoetal.(2015b,Section4). 13A detailed description of the weighting procedure is included in the Supplementary Appendix.14Werestrictthesampletofoundersoperatingthesamebusinessasatstart- up because we are interested in the survival and business development of the initially subsidized businesses. Furthermore, detailed business outcomes areonly observed for the original start-up cohort of businesses created in the first quarter of 2009. Restricting it to self-employment as main activity excludes businesses which are run only as secondary or part-time activities, e.g., in ad-dition to another full-time job or attending university. 15Colombelli et al. (2016) report survival rates of business start-ups below 50% within the first five
et al. (2016) report survival rates of business start-ups below 50% within the first five years. Bartelsmann et al. (2005) find for OECD countries that 20–40% fail within the first two years. Therefore, the survivalratesinoursamplearesignificantlyhigher,whichcanbeexplained(inpart)by the construction of our sample, i.e., we consider only start-ups in full-time by male founders.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 5
Fig. 2.Business development over time. Note:Reported are shares and averages for subsidized business founders (out of unemployment) and regular business founders(i.e.,non-subsidizedoutofnon-unemployment)whoareself-employedattherespectivepointintimewiththesamebusinessasatstart-up.Wave1(wave2) values are measured 19 (40) months after start-up. Outcomes are weighted for panel attrition. ***/**/* indicates significant difference at the 1/5/10% level. aIncome measures are inflation-adjusted to 2010 levels (Federal Statistical Office, 2014). We excluded outliers who reported a monthly income from self-em- ployment larger than€ 25,000. bNumberoffull-timeequivalentemployees(FTE)isaweightedsum,wherefull-timeemployeesareassignedaweightof1,part-timeemployeesandapprenticesare weighted by 0.5, and others by 0.25. We excluded some outliers from the analysis who reported implausibly high values. cConstrained access to capital indicates that founders wanted to borrow but did not receive a loan.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 6
dependentlyemployed,whiletheunemploymentshareisrelativelylow at 3.3%. In contrast, the slight increase in the survival rate of regular foun- ders can be explained by individuals who temporarily ran their busi- nesses only part-time in wave 1 (predominately due to parallel higher education)andreturntotheirbusinessesasthemainactivityinwave2. In fact, this is true for 11.2% of regular founders. Since 5% of self- employed regular founders from wave 1 quit their businesses as the main activity by wave 2, this results in a net increase in business sur- vival of 6.2%-points, as reported in Table 1. The share of dependently employed (unemployed), at 13.2% (1.2%), is significantly lower than for subsidized founders. Taken together, while labor market integration is comparable be- tween thetwogroups, thedescriptive shares indicatea lower business survival among formerly subsidized business founders compared to regular founders 40 months after start-up. 4.2. Comparisonofbusinessperformanceandinnovationactivities To assess the business performance, we restrict our sample to founders who are still self-employed and actively operating the same businessasatstart-upinthefirstquarterof2009ateachinterview.We consider four different sets of variables: (i) income, (ii) job creation, (iii) degree of innovation as outcome variables, and (iv) access to ca- pital as an intermediate business indicator. Income is measured as monthly and as hourly net earned income from self-employment (in euros,inflation-adjustedto2010levelsfollowingthe FederalStatistical Office, 2014). With respect to job creation, we consider both the ex-tensive andintensive margin, i.e., theshare of businesses with at least oneemployeeaswellasthenumberoffull-timeequivalentemployees, bothunconditionallyandconditionalonhavingatleastoneemployee. Thenumberoffull-timeequivalentemployeesisaweightedsumwhere full-time employees are assigned a weight of 1, part-time employees and apprentices are weighted by 0.5, and others by
are assigned a weight of 1, part-time employees and apprentices are weighted by 0.5, and others by 0.25. Within the entrepreneurship literature, the degree of innovation is usually mea- sured by patents (Coad and Rao, 2008; Griliches, 1990) or subjective perceptions of entrepreneurs on innovational activities (Cefis and Marsili, 2006; Colombelli et al., 2016; Pellegrino et al., 2012). While patents can be considered to be more objective, they are at the same alsomorenarrowbecausenotallinnovationsarepatented(Halletal., 2001; Moser, 2016), leading potentially to an underestimation of the truedegreeofinnovation.Incontrast,subjectiveperceptionsaremuch broader,butalsofacetherisktosuffermeasurementerror.Inourstudy, we have indicators for both objective and subjective measures avail- able.Asobjectiveindicators,weobservetheshareoffounderswhofiled at least one patent application or an application to protect corporate identitysincestart-up.Thesubjectivemeasureisbasedonthequestion whetherbusinessesgeneratenewideas,questioningexistingprocesses.Finally,accesstocapitalisreflectedbytheshareoffounderswhohave receivedaloansincestart-upandtheshareoffounderswhoseaccessto capital was constrained in that they wanted to borrow but did not re- ceive a loan. 16 4.2.1. Businessperformance Focussing on business performance indicators, Fig. 2shows the re- sults of a comparison of formerly subsidized and regular businesseswith respect to income, job creation and access to capital measured at wave 1 (19 months after start-up) and wave 2 (40 months after start- up). The dark bars represent the average outcome of formerly sub- sidized founders, while the light bars depict the gaps to regular foun- ders for a given point in time. The dashed lines connecting the bars between waves illustrate the intragroup development over time. Sig- nificant gaps between groups and significant changes over time are indicated by stars attached to the reported differences. IncomeThe development of the earnings
are indicated by stars attached to the reported differences. IncomeThe development of the earnings profiles of subsidized foundersin Fig.2aandbshowsasignificantincreaseovertimeinboth monthly net income (from € 2,400 to € 2,800) 17and hourly net earn- ings (from € 11.7 to € 14.4), which might be explained by market se- lectionaswellasincreasedproductivityorprofitability.Incomparison, monthly earned net income for regular founders stagnates over time, yetonasignificantlyhigherlevelaround€3,100.Insum,thisresultsin a reduced monthly income gap between both groups (from € 700 to about€230).However,whilemonthlyincomesareconverging,thegap in hourly earnings grew from € 4.10 in wave 1 to € 6.60 in wave 2, indicating an increasing disparity with respect to productivity or prof- itability between the two groups. Jobcreation Fig.2c–ereportsignificantlyincreasingnumbersforjob creationamongformerlysubsidizedandregularbusinessesonboththe extensive as well as intensive margin over time. While the majority of formerly subsidized businesses still operate as solopreneurs in wave 2, 45% of this group employ on average 3.3 full-time equivalent em- ployees (FTE), a significant increase on both margins compared to wave 1 by 10%-points and 0.4 FTE, respectively. Overall, this re- presentsasignificantincreaseintheaveragenumberofFTEfrom1.0in wave 1 to 1.4 per operating business by the end of our observationTable 1 Main labor market status. Subsidized founders Regular founders Comp.: Sub.v. reg. Wave 1 Wave 2 Change Wave 1 Wave 2 Change Wave 1 Wave 2 (1) (2) (1) v. (2) (3) (4) (3) v. (4) (1) v. (3) (2) v. (4) Self-employed with same businessa0.797 0.711 −0.086*** 0.717 0.779 0.062*** 0.079*** −0.068*** Dep. employed 0.122 0.196 0.073*** 0.104 0.132 0.027** 0.018 0.064*** Unemployedb0.051 0.033 −0.018* 0.012 0.012 −0.000 0.038*** 0.021*** Number of obs. 827 827 453 453 1280 1280 Note:Reported are shares for subsidized business founders (out of unemployment) and regular business founders
are shares for subsidized business founders (out of unemployment) and regular business founders (i.e., non-subsidized out of non-unemployment). Positive (negative) intergroup differences indicate a higher (lower) value amongsubsidized founders. Wave 1 (wave 2) values are measured 19 (40) months after start-up.Missingcategoriesnotreportedherearemarginalemployment,highereducation/vocationaltraining,andothermainactivity.Outcomesareweightedforpanel attrition. ***/**/* indicates significant difference at the 1/5/10% level. aSelf-employed with same business as at start-up. bUnemployed or participation in active labor market program (ALMP). 16As a limitation, we neither observe the total amount of the loan nor whe- ther individuals who did not receive a loan but wanted to borrow actually applied for a loan. 17To set these figures in perspective, the German Federal Statistical Office (2012, p.106)reportsaveragemonthlygrossearningsof€2976foramalefull- timeworkerindependentemploymentinGermanyinthethirdquarterof2012 (when income measures 40 months after start-up were surveyed). Applying a net-to-grossratioof70%,assumingathree-personhousehold(marriedcouple,one child) with one breadwinner and residence in West Germany (Federal Statistical Office, 2013, p. 10) and adjusting for inflation to 2010 le- vels, this translates into net monthly earnings of € 2,001.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 7
window. Combining these job creation numbers with the self-employ- ment shares in each wave (see Table 1again) yields the direct em- ploymenteffectspersubsidygranted,irrespective ofbusinesssurvival.Ontopofhelpingthefoundertostartabusinessandthusprovidinghim with an employment opportunity, each subsidy in the initial start-up cohort results on average in an additional0.8 FTE (0.797 × 1.0 FTE) after 19months andin additional1.0FTE(0.711 × 1.4FTE)after40 months. This indicates a substantial “double dividend” of the subsidy. In contrast, only one third of regular business founders are solo- preneursinwave2andtheremainingbusinessesemploysevenFTEon average. In total, the group differences between formerly subsidized andregularbusinesses onalljobcreationindicatorsinbothwavesare statistically significant. While there is some minor catching up on the extensive margin by wave 2, the employer rate is still 50% (or 22%- pointsinabsoluteterms)higheramongregularfounders.Furthermore, the gaps on the intensive margin are highly persistent and even widening over time. Among all employer businesses, the average number of FTE for regular founders is 7.2, more than twice as high compared to 3.3 for formerly subsidized businesses. 18Compared to subsidized founders, the additional direct employment effects among regularbusinessesarehigherandonaverageamountto2.7FTE(0.717 × 3.7FTE) after 19months and 3.7FTE (0.779 × 4.8FTE) after 40 months per newly founded business of the initial start-up cohort. Capitalconstraints Asanadditionalintermediatebusinessindicator, we investigate access to capital as a critical factor for business devel- opmentandgrowth(Aghionetal.,2007;Pissarides,1999;Wiklundand Shepherd,2003). Fig.2fshowsthatthe(cumulative)shareofformerly subsidized founders who have successfully received a loan since start-up increased from 21% in wave 1 to 29% in wave 2. The shares are 15%-pointslowercomparedtoregularfoundersinbothwaves.Itisnot directly clear, however, whether these gaps in
directly clear, however, whether these gaps in take-up rates reflect differential access to capital or merely differences in the demand for capital.Thisiswhy Fig.2greportstheshareoffounderswhoseaccessto creditwasconstrainedinthesensethattheywantedtoborrowbutdid notreceivealoan.Creditconstraintsaffect13%offormerlysubsidized founders in wave 1 and 16% in wave 2. For regular founders, the numbers decrease over time from 12% to 11%, which represents a significantgapof5%-pointscomparedtoformerlysubsidizedfounders at the end of our observation window. This evidence is in line with unemployed founders facing more severe barriers to access loans (see, e.g.,Perry,2006).Takingbothsharesfrom Figs.2fand 2gtogetherasa crude measure for total loan demand (satisfied and unsatisfied), we nevertheless find higher prevalence among regular founders by about 14%-pointsinwave1and10%-pointsinwave2.Thisresultmightalso reflect less capital intensive business opportunities and lower growth oriented ambitions and strategies of formerly subsidized businesses. 4.2.2. Innovationactivities Fig.3showstheresultswithrespecttoinnovationactivities.While information on patenting and protection of corporate identity is mea- suredinwave1(19monthsafterstart-up)andwave2(40monthsafter start-up), the subjective measure (development of new ideas) is only available in wave 2. Figures 3a and 3b show that both types of business founders are increasinglyinvolvedininnovationovertime.Theapplicationratesfor patentsas acommonmeasurefor innovativeactivity reaches2.2%for formerly subsidized businesses, but is more than twice as high for regular businesses (5.9%) in wave 2. 19As an alternative objectiveinnovation indicator, we also analyze the shares of businesses that apply forprotection oftheircorporateID.We findasimilarpatternas forpatents,i.e.,theratesareincreasingovertimebutonahigherlevel. The rates are 9.1% for formerly subsidized businesses and 15.5% for regular ones. Regarding the subjective indicator, Fig. 3c
subsidized businesses and 15.5% for regular ones. Regarding the subjective indicator, Fig. 3c shows that 37.6% ofsubsidized businesses reporting development of new ideasin wave 2, which is 6.7%-points less than for the group of regular busi- nesses. As expected and discussed above, measuring innovation based on patents (Fig. 3a) leads to a much lower number compared to the subjectivemeasure(Fig.3c).Thisisinlinewithotherstudiesreporting 30–40% using subjective perceptions to measure innovation (see Colombellietal.,2016;Pellegrinoetal.,2012).However,independent of the absolute degree of innovation, the key finding here is that for- merly subsidized founders persistently lag behind in innovative activ- ities.Thisisinlinewiththetheoreticalexpectationsin Section2.Dueto negative externalities induced by the subsidy and disadvantagedstarting conditions (in particular with respect to knowledge context), subsidizedbusinessesoutofunemploymentareexpectedtoinduceless innovation than non-subsidized business start-ups out of non-un- employment. All in all, we can conclude that formerly subsidized businesses in- deedgrowandbecomemoreinnovativeovertime.Comparedtoregular businesses,however,theystillsignificantlylagbehind40monthsafter start-up, with decreasing differences in monthly incomes but persis- tentlyremainingorevengrowinggapswithrespecttoproductivity,job creation, investments and innovation. 5. What explains the differences? We now want to explore possible explanations for this finding. As discussed in the introduction, the groups of subsidized and regular founders differ in their individual and business-related start-up char- acteristics for several reasons. Besides the fact that the subsidy might induce an adverse selection, starting a business out of unemployment by itself might also lead to more severe disadvantages and restrictions compared to regular founders (see Section 2). This suggests that un- employed individuals who enter entrepreneurship might have lowerhuman
2). This suggests that un- employed individuals who enter entrepreneurship might have lowerhuman capital and entrepreneurial abilities and set up smaller busi- nesses with less growth potential due to more restrictive access to re- sources like social networks or capital, less time to explore business opportunities and strategies, or lower growth ambitions. Caliendo et al. (2015b) indeed find evidence indicating initial differ- ences in observable characteristics at the time of business formation, showing that subsidized founders suffer from a shortage of employ- ment-andindustry-specificexperience,moreseverecapitalconstraints, and fewer spillovers from intergenerational transmissions than regular founders. Using the panel data, in a first step, we now look at whether these differences remain for the surviving businesses over time or whether the two groups converged once the subsidyhas fully expired andboth groupswereequallyexposedtofullmarketmechanisms.Althoughone couldassumethatthesurvivingbusinessesinwave2 aremore similar intheircharacteristicsthanthetwofullinitialstart-upcohorts,wewill seeinSection5.1 thatthisisnotthecase,andsignificantdifferencesin observable characteristics remain. Hence, in a subsequent step, we analyzeinSection5.2 towhatextentthesedifferencescanexplainthe 18BasedontheGermanMicrocensus,anannualrepresentative1%surveyof the German population, Petermann and Piorkowsky (2013, pp. 15, 177) find that in 2009 (parallel to the business start-ups in our sample), 72.2% of male business founders in main activity started as solopreneurs, while in 2012 (parallel to wave 2) 52.4% of all men with self-employment as their main ac- tivity have at least one employee.19Forcomparison, Niefert(2005),usingdatafromtheZEWFoundationPanel (Almusetal.,2000),findsthat3.2%ofasampleofGermanstart-upsfoundedinthe early 1990s applied for at least one patent by 1999/2000. However, these numbers are not conditional on survival and therefore underestimate patent
However, these numbers are not conditional on survival and therefore underestimate patent applicationsforsurvivors. EngelandKeilbach(2007) report,basedonasample of21,517Germanbusinessesfoundedbetween1995–1998originatingfromthe same data source, that at the time of business formation, 2.2% of all start-ups applied for at least one patent.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 8
gap in business survival and business development. 5.1. Comparisonofobservablestart-upcharacteristics Table 2shows a comparison of some selected observable char- acteristics at business formation for the start-up cohort in the first quarterof2009(columns1and2)andforallself-employedindividuals with the same business as at start-up in wave 2 (columns 3 and 4).20 While subsidized founders at start-up do not lag behind in formaleducation, they show less intergenerational transmissions in terms of parental self-employment and business takeover from their parents, haveloweremploymentexperiences,operateunderlessfavorablelocal market conditions and have less industry-specific experience and ca- pital. In contrast to the general expectations that subsidized founders out of unemployment are primarily driven by necessity and regular foundersbyopportunitymotives,wefindthattheopportunitymotive– the desire to be one’s own boss – is the dominating motive in both groups (38% and 41% for subsidized and regular founders respec- tively).However,wealsoseethathighersharesofsubsidizedfounders (23%)reportaclassicalnecessitymotive–theunavailabilityofregular employment – compared to regular founders (10%). As reported in columns 3 and 4, initial differences, to a large degree, have not van- ished once we restrict the comparison to formerly subsidized and reg- ular founders who remain active with the same business up until wave2.Itcanbeseenthatthedistributionofobservablecharacteristics changes slightly for both groups, reflecting the selection of surviving businesses over time. There is no clear pattern of the selection me- chanism,though.Whilethetwogroupsbecomemoresimilar,e.g.,with respect to nationality, university education, or sector choice, the dif- ferences between the groups get even more pronounced over time in other characteristics like parental self-employment, unemployment or industry-specific experience. Overall, the differences between
self-employment, unemployment or industry-specific experience. Overall, the differences between thegroupsremainsignificantandsubstantial,inparticularwithrespectto intergenerational transmissions, lifetime unemployment, start-up mo- tives, industry-specific experience, and start-up capital. 5.2. Decompositionanalysis Giventhatthesedifferencesstill exist40months after start-up,the questionarisesastowhatextentthestructuraldifferencesinobservable characteristics at start-upexplain the gap in business development. To shedlightonthisquestion,weconductaBlinder-Oaxacadecomposition analysis(Blinder,1973;Oaxaca,1973)anddecomposetherawgapsin businessperformanceΔ Rawintoanexplainedpartduetodifferencesin initial characteristics and an unexplained part:21 = = = +Y Y F X F X F X F X F X F X( ) ( ) { ( ) ( )} { ( ) ( )}RawSub Reg sub i sub reg i reg sub i sub sub i reg Explainedsub i reg reg i reg Unexplained, , , , , , (1) More specifically, we arrange the full list of 70 observable character- istics at business formation into seven blocks of related variables on personal characteristics, human capital, intergenerational transmis- sions, labor market history, regional information, start-up motives, as well as business characteristics (further divided into business sector, industry-specificexperience,andstartcapitalformoredetailedinsight) and control for the blocks individually and jointly (X i). Our two main outcome variables of interest are business survival and whether thebusiness has created any employment. 22Since both outcomes are Fig. 3.Innovationactivitiesovertime. Note:Reportedaresharesforsubsidizedbusinessfounders(outofunemployment)andregularbusinessfounders(i.e.,non- subsidized out of non-unemployment) who are self-employed at the respective point in time with the same business as at start-up. Wave 1 (wave 2) values are measured 19 (40) months after start-up. Outcomes are weighted for panel attrition. ***/**/* indicates significant difference at the 1/5/10% level.
are weighted for panel attrition. ***/**/* indicates significant difference at the 1/5/10% level. aInnovation was surveyed only for a random 50% subsample. bThe variable is based on respondents’ judgement concerning the following statement: “My business aims to generate new ideas, questioning existing processes”. Respondentsansweredonascalefrom1-totallyagreeto7-totallydisagree.Wedefineadummyindicatortakingthevalueoneforvalues1to3,andzerootherwise. The question is not availablein wave 1. 20Thefulllist ofobservablecharacteristics atbusinessformationis reported in Table A.1 in the Supplementary Appendix.21Fordetailsontheimplementationofthedecompositionanalysis,seeTable A.2 in the Supplementary Appendix. 22Inaddition,wereporttheresultsofthedecompositionanalysisforthegaps in hourly income and number of full-time employees in Table A.3 in theSupplementary Appendix. The findings are very similar to those for the two main outcomes. Regarding innovation-related outcome variables, we cannot run the detailed decomposition analysis due to too small sample size. TheM.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 9
binary, we choose a probit approach, setting = F(·) (·), and use maximum likelihood for estimation.23Results are reported in Table 3. Start-up characteristics Panel A in Table 3shows that, un- conditionally,formerlysubsidizedfoundershaveanegativerawgapin business survival of 6.8%-points in wave 2 compared to regular foun- ders (as already reported in Table 1). Controlling for each of the cov- ariate blocks reported in Panel C individually (specifications 1 to 7)reveals that this gap is mainly explained by differences in inter- generational transmissions (accounting for 53% of the survival gap, spec.3)andlabormarkethistories(104%,spec.4). 24Start-upmotives(31%, spec. 6) and business sector choice (28%, spec. 7a) are also im- portant, but to a lesser extent. Once we condition on all start-up char- acteristicsavailable(spec.8),theunexplainedgapinbusinesssurvival virtuallyvanishes,becomespositivebutclosetozeroandinsignificant. Panel B repeats the exercises for the dummy variable indicating at least one employee in wave 2. This time, the control variables only explain a small fraction of the raw gap, with intergenerational trans- missions (14%, spec. 3), start-up motives (12%, spec. 6) and business- relatedcharacteristics(22%,spec.7)havingthehighestbut,inabsolute terms,verylowexplanatorypower.Thefulllistofvariablesreducesthe unexplained performancegap by only15%(spec. 8).This implies that the differences in job creation are driven by other factors that are not sufficiently captured by our list of available start-up characteristics. Asaninterestingsidenote,ifweconductadecompositionanalysis for the employment dummy in wave 1 (see Table A.4 in theTable 2 Comparison of selected start-up characteristics between subsidized and regular founders. Self-employed founders at start-up with same business in wave 2a Sub. Reg. Mean Sub. Reg. Mean Selected listbof founders founders diff. founders founders diff. start-up characteristics (1) (2) (1) v. (2) (3) (4) (3) v. (4)
diff. founders founders diff. start-up characteristics (1) (2) (1) v. (2) (3) (4) (3) v. (4) A.Personalcharacteristics Age (in years) 42.0 45.2 −3.2*** 41.8 45.3 −3.5*** Not German 0.076 0.044 0.032*** 0.060 0.051 0.009 B.Humancapital Upper secondary school 0.474 0.475 −0.001 0.479 0.494 −0.016 Technical college education (master craftsman) 0.173 0.252 −0.079*** 0.190 0.280 −0.090*** University education 0.309 0.282 0.027 0.310 0.298 0.011 C.Intergenerationaltransmission Parents are/were self-employed 0.328 0.462 −0.134*** 0.332 0.501 −0.169*** Business takeover from parents 0.034 0.170 −0.135*** 0.047 0.214 −0.167*** Upper secondary schoolingof father 0.253 0.249 0.004 0.236 0.239 −0.003 D.Labormarkethistory Monthly net income from last dep. employment right before start-up €0−€1000 0.094 0.050 0.045*** 0.090 0.042 0.048*** >€2500 0.206 0.164 0.042*** 0.214 0.178 0.036* No unemployment experience before start-up 0.051 0.542 −0.491*** 0.062 0.581 −0.519*** E.Regionalinformation Local macroeconomic conditions Vacancies related to stock of unemployed 14.9 15.6 −0.7** 15.0 15.6 −0.6* Unemployment rate 8.6 7.5 1.0*** 8.6 7.6 1.0*** F.Start-upmotivesc Desire to be one’s own boss 0.376 0.412 −0.036* 0.389 0.461 −0.072*** Unavailability of regular job 0.227 0.101 0.126*** 0.190 0.091 0.099*** G.Business-relatedcharacteristics Sectoral distribution of businesses Manufacturing, crafts 0.140 0.223 −0.083*** 0.170 0.240 −0.070*** Other services 0.245 0.193 0.052*** 0.220 0.186 0.034* Industry-spec. experience before start- up due to former self-employment 0.202 0.265 −0.063*** 0.192 0.278 −0.085*** Capital invested at start-up None 0.193 0.178 0.016 0.162 0.150 0.012 ≥€50,000 0.080 0.181 −0.101*** 0.101 0.204 −0.104*** Number of obs. 827 453 1280 614 360 974 Note:All reported numbers are shares (unless stated otherwise) for subsidized business founders (out of unemployment) and regular business founders (i.e., non- subsidized out of non-unemployment) and refer to start-up.
regular business founders (i.e., non- subsidized out of non-unemployment) and refer to start-up. Positive (negative) intergroup differences indicate a higher (lower) value among subsidized founders. Variables are weighted for panel attrition. ***/**/* indicate significantly different means between the two groups at the 1/5/10% level. aSelf-employed with same business in wave 2 as at start-up. bA full list of start-up characteristics is reported in Table A.1 in the Supplementary Appendix. cReported are shares of individuals with values of 6 and 7 on a 7-point Likert-type scale from 1 “does not apply at all” to 7 “applies completely”. (footnotecontinued)information on innovationis only availablefor 50%of the sample,and onlyasmall fraction reports such activities at all. 23Estimations are conducted in Stata using the nldecompose-package (Sinning et al.,2008). 24An explained share of more than 100% indicates that the inclusion of the controlvariableschangestheinitiallynegativeunconditionalgaptoapositiveconditional gap. A negative explained share means that the control variables (footnotecontinued)increasetheabsoluteamountoftheinitialgap.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 10
Table 3 Decomposition analysis of business performance gaps between formerly subsidized and regular founders. Specification Raw gap (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7a) (7b) (7c) (7) (8) A.Outcomevariable: Self-employed with same business in wave 2a Unexplained −0.068*** −0.087*** −0.065** −0.032 0.003 −0.066** −0.047 −0.049* −0.096*** −0.067** −0.073** 0.006 Explained 0.019 −0.003 −0.036*** −0.071** −0.002 −0.021** −0.019** 0.028*** 0.000 0.005 −0.075** % Explained −27.5 4.6 53.3 104.2 2.5 30.9 28.4 −41.1 −0.4 −8.0 109.2 Number of obs. 1280 1280 1280 1280 1280 1280 1280 1280 1280 1280 1280 1280 B.Outcomevariable: At least one employee in wave 2 Unexplained −0.220*** −0.253*** −0.208*** −0.188*** −0.256*** −0.204*** −0.192*** −0.207*** −0.216*** −0.179*** −0.171*** −0.188*** Explained 0.034⁎⁎−0.011 −0.031 0.036 −0.016 −0.027** −0.013 −0.004 −0.040** −0.049** −0.033 % Explained −15.6 5.1 14.2 −16.3 7.4 12.3 5.9 1.7 18.3 22.2 15.1 Number of obs. 974 974 974 974 974 974 974 974 974 974 974 974 C.Controlvariablesb: Start-up characteristics: (1)Personalcharact. √ √ (2)Humancapital √ √ (3)Intergen.transm. √ √ (4)Labormarkethist. √ √ (5)Regionalinfo. √ √ (6)Start-upmotives √ √ (7)Businesscharact. (a)Businesssector √ √ √ (b)Ind.-spec.exper. √ √ √ (c)Startcapital √ √ √ Total number of control variables 9 5 7 16 6 7 7 6 7 20 70 Note:ReportedareestimationresultsofaBlinder-Oaxacaprobitdecompositionforsubsidizedbusinessfounders(outofunemployment)asthebasegroupusingtheStatapackage nldecompose (Sinningetal.,2008).For details,seeTableA.2intheSupplementaryAppendix.Standarderrorsarebootstrappedusing499replications.Outcomesareweightedforpanelattrition.***/**/*indicatesstatisticalsignificanceatthe1/5/10%level. aSelf-employed with same business as at start-up. bA detailed list and summary descriptives of the underlying control variables are reported in Table A.1 in the Supplementary Appendix.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 11
Supplementary Appendix), start-up characteristics explain almost 50% of the employment gaps in wave 1, with start-up capital (25%), inter- generational transmissions (22%), and start-up motives (11%) pro- viding the highest explanatory contributions. Thus, while start-up characteristics are strong determinants of short-term business perfor- mance, business growth in the longer run instead seems to be more affected by other factors. Businessstrategiesand dynamics To test alternative explanations for thegapsinemploymentgrowthinwave2,weextendthelistofcontrol variablesXiin the decomposition analysis by adding factors that cap- ture business strategies and dynamics. In a first step, we include two indicatorsonaccesstocapital.Asalreadyreportedin Section4.2,while formerly subsidized founders have lower demand for capital and facemoreseverecreditconstraintsthanregularfounders,accesstocapitalis a crucial factor forbusiness growth (Aghion et al., 2007; Wiklundand Shepherd, 2003). In a second step, we aim to consider unobserved factorsthatcanbesummarizedintotwogroups.Ontheonehand,there are unobserved variables at start-up that reflect the fundamental busi- ness strategy and access to innovation-specific knowledge, like the founder’s intention, opportunity and ability to innovate and grow at business formation (see Section 2for a discussion why we expect dif- ferences in this regard between subsidized and regular start-ups). On the other hand, there are business dynamics after start-up, where foundersimplementtheirinitialstrategiesandadapttheirdecisionsas a reaction to challenges and changes in their business environment. Sincethesevariablesareunobservedinourdata,weinsteadincludethe intermediate wave 1 outcome on employment as a proxy variable. It can be seen as the resultof all observable and unobservable factors in the early business phase up until wave 1 and thus should best in-corporate the unobserved initial business strategies as well as early business dynamics that we do
the unobserved initial business strategies as well as early business dynamics that we do not capture in our previous analysis. Results are reported in Table 4. Torecapourbaselineresultsfromabove,therawemploymentgap in wave 2 amounts to 22%-points (first column of Table 4), and only 15%(or3%-points)ofthegapcanbeexplainedoncewecontrolforall available start-up characteristics (spec. 8), as already reported inTable 3. If we additionally include the two indicators on access to ca- pital (spec. 9), the explained part almost doubles to 28%, once again emphasizing the important role for business growth. Taken together withtheresultsabove,wethusfindthatwhilestart-upcapitalexplains asubstantialpartofshorttermgrowth,accesstocapitalisincreasingly important for business growth in the longer term. Controlling for the wave 1 outcome as a proxy for initial business strategiesandearlybusinessdynamicsalongwithallavailablestart-up characteristics (spec. 10) increases the explained share to more than 53%. The specification including all start-up characteristics, access to capital indicators as well as the wave 1 outcome (spec. 11) explains more than 60% of the employment gap in wave 2 between formerly subsidized founders and regular founders. In summary, the decomposition analysis shows that differences in business survival disappear entirely once we control for the (ob- servable) structural differences between the types of businesses and founder characteristics at start-up. Yet, only the short-run gap in job creation can be explained by initial endowment differences to a larger extent (49%). The long-run gap in business growth paths rather seems to be driven by unobserved factors like initial business strategies, dif- ferential access to capital, and post-start-up business dynamics. 6. Conclusion and policy implications Policies encouraging and supporting unemployed individuals to start a business have become common instruments of ALMP in many
unemployed individuals to start a business have become common instruments of ALMP in many developedcountries.Butdespitethisrecentgrowthinpopularity,they are increasingly becoming subject to criticism. From an active labor marketpolicyperspective, start-up subsidies for unemployed individualsare very effective in improving long-term labor market outcomes for participants. From a business perspective, however, the assessment of thesepublicprogramsislessclearandhardevidenceislargelymissing. Our paper provides first evidence on the longer term business andin- novation potential of start-ups from unemployment. Although our re-sultsaregeneratedbasedonGermany,itislikelythattheyalsoapplyto other industrialized countries given the high similarity in terms of Table 4 Additional decomposition analysis of employment gaps between formerly subsidized and regular founders. Specification Raw gap (8) (9) (10) (11) A.Outcomevariable: At least one employee in wave 2 Unexplained −0.220*** −0.188*** −0.161*** −0.102* −0.083 Explained −0.033 −0.061 −0.115** −0.134*** % Explained 15.1 27.5 53.1 61.6 Number of obs. 974 974 974 974 974 B.Controlvariables: Start-up characteristicsa: (1)Personalcharacteristics √ √ √ √ (2)Humancapital √ √ √ √ (3)Intergen.transmissions √ √ √ √ (4)Labormarkethistory √ √ √ √ (5)Regionalinformation √ √ √ √ (6)Start-upmotives √ √ √ √ (7)Businesscharacteristics √ √ √ √ Additional business indicators in wave 2: (9)Accesstocapitalsincestart-upb√ √ Wave 1 outcome:(10)Atleastoneemployee c√ √ Total number of control variables 70 72 71 73 Note:ReportedareestimationresultsofaBlinder-Oaxacaprobitdecompositionforsubsidizedbusinessfounders(outofunemployment)asthebasegroupusingthe Statapackage nldecompose (Sinningetal.,2008).Fordetails,seeTableA.2intheSupplementaryAppendix.Standarderrorsarebootstrappedusing499replications. Outcomes are weighted for panel attrition. ***/**/* indicates statistical significance at the 1/5/10% level. aA detailed list and summary descriptives of
statistical significance at the 1/5/10% level. aA detailed list and summary descriptives of the underlying control variables are reported in Table A.1 in the Supplementary Appendix. bAccesstocapitalincludestwodummyvariablesindicatingwhetherthefounderreceivedaloansincestart-upandwhetherthefounderwantedtoborrowbutdid not receive a loan. Summary descriptive statistics are reported in Fig. 2h and i. cSummary descriptive statistics are reported in Fig. 2c.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 12
institutional settings of start-up subsidy programs for unemployed job seekers (see Caliendo, 2016). We therefore contribute to the ongoing critical debate about the benefits and concerns related to this type ofpublic policy (Acs et al., 2016; Colombelli et al., 2016; Lerner, 2010; Shane, 2009). The analysis is based on an extension of the dataset used in Caliendoetal.(2015b) containingrepresentativesamplesofbusinesses emerging from a German start-up subsidy program targeted at un-employed individuals and regular businesses that were started out of non-unemploymentanddidnotreceivethesubsidy.Afollow-upsurvey allowsusacomparisonupuntil40monthsafterbusinessformationand permits an in-depth assessment of the development, growth and in- novation potential of subsidized start-ups (in comparison to regular start-ups). Insum,wefindthatthesubsidyattractsindividualswhofacemore severerestrictionswithrespecttotheavailabilityoforaccesstohuman, social, and financial capital. These individuals also display lower am- bitions,intentions,strategies,orcapabilitiesforgrowthandinnovation. Consequently, while survival rates are relatively high, initially sub- sidizedfounderspersistentlyperformworsethanregularfoundersfrom abusinessperspective,especiallyintermsofjobcreationandinnovation activity. For instance, only 2.2% (9.1%) of formerly subsidized busi- nesses filed a patent application (applied for protection of their corporate ID) within a time period of 40 months after start-up, com- pared to 5.9% (15.5%) among the regular business founders. Considering a more subjective assessment of innovation, 37.6% of formerly subsidized business owners and 44.3% of regular businesses report development of new ideas. The gaps are relatively constant or even widening over time. Hence, we do not see any indication of catching up in the longer run. Within the sample of founders who are stillactivelyoperatingtheirbusinessesinwave2,marketselectiondid not lead to a substantial convergence of (observable)
not lead to a substantial convergence of (observable) start-up char- acteristicsbetweenthetwogroups.Whilethesedifferencescanentirelyexplain the gap in business survival, they do not represent the major empirical reason for the shortcomings in business growth and innova- tion. Exploring this point further, we find suggestive evidence that particularly a restricted access to capital as well as fundamentally dif- ferent business strategies and early business dynamics explain a large part of the persistent gap in business innovation and growth. Thesefindingsareinstarkcontrasttotherobustempiricalevidence from anALMP perspective showing that unemployed individuals are muchbetteroffparticipatingthannotparticipatinginstart-upsubsidyprograms (see Caliendo and Künn, 2011; Caliendo et al., 2016; Wolff etal., 2016,amongothers).Therefore, fromapolicystandpoint,start-up subsidies are seen as a highly effective tool to persistently re- integrate formerly unemployed individuals into the labor market and improvetheirincomesituations.Onaverage,theprogramcostsamount to € 4900per participant, 25whichis relatively lowcompared toother major ALMP programs (e.g., € 8200 for public employment schemes and € 4150 for wage subsidies in 2009), and in particular, given the additional job creation of 1.0 FTE per participant after 40 months (as calculated above). Considering these conflicting results for the assessment of the sub- sidy program, policy makers need to carefully weigh the costs and benefits of such an ALMP strategy to find the right policy mix. While theseprogramsarehighlyeffectiveinsustainablyimprovingindividual labormarketprospectsandstimulatesomeadditionaljobcreation,theyfall short of succeeding as an entrepreneurship policy in that they donotspurthecreationofhigh-growthorinnovativenewbusinesses,and themagnitudeofadditionaljobgrowthisratherlimited.Directchanges to the subsidy program are likely to cause trade-off effects between effectivenessasan activelabormarketpolicy
program are likely to cause trade-off effects between effectivenessasan activelabormarketpolicy andasabusinesspolicy.For instance,toimprovetheaverageperformanceofsubsidizedbusinesses,acceptance into the subsidy program could be combined with better screening or morerestrictive selectionon certain (observable)founder and start-up characteristics to identify and approve only the most promising business proposals. One downside of this approach is that while observable start-up characteristics entirely explain the survival gaps, they contribute little to the explanation of the shortcomings in business growth. Thus further investigations and a careful im- plementation would be necessary. Furthermore, this approach would likely result in higher rejection rates of those unemployed nascent en- trepreneurs who need the subsidy the most, and thus it would likely yield increasing deadweight effects. Also, this approach implies lower accesstothesubsidyfordisadvantagedindividualswithlessfavorable characteristics, who, in turn, derive the highest labor market benefits from participation (Caliendo and Künn, 2011). To spur job creation, economic growth, and innovation nascent founders and in particular unemployed nascent founders might need additional encouragement and advice during the pre or early start-up phasetoimproveandmaturetheirbusinessideaandplanforandfactor in future business growth. In this sense, additional soft support mea- sures like coaching,counseling, mentoring, or training (accompanying the subsidy) during the pre or early start-up phase might improve business potential and long-term development (see, e.g., Rotger et al., 2012; Wren and Storey, 2002). An additional issue that might hinderbusinessgrowthforformerlyunemployedsubsidizedfoundersseemsto behigherrestrictionstoaccesscapital.Sincewecannotclearlyidentify whethertheyaremainlysupply-ordemand-driven,furtherresearchto investigate this topic more closely is necessary. On a final note, it should also be kept in
investigate this topic more closely is necessary. On a final note, it should also be kept in mind that in micro level studies on an individual ALMP or business perspective, general equili- brium effects such as displacement or crowding out usually cannot be takenintoaccount.Althoughevidenceontheseeffectswouldbehighly informativeforpolicymakersaswell,empiricalanalysesonthemacro effects of start-up subsidy programs on aggregated (un)employment and growth are very rare due to severe data limitations. Nevertheless, potential displacement effects of any business support measure should also always be carefully considered in this context. Declaration of Competing Interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influ- ence the work reported in this paper. Supplementary material Supplementarymaterialassociatedwiththisarticlecanbefound,in the online version, at 10.1016/j.respol.2020.104053. References Acs, Z., Åstebro, T., Audretsch, D., Robinson, D.T., 2016. Public policy to promote en- trepreneurship: a call to arms. Small Bus. Econ. 47 (1), 35–51. https://doi.org/10. 1007/s11187-016-9712-2. Agarwal,R.,Shah,S.K.,2014.Knowledgesourcesofentrepreneurship:firmformationby academic,user and employee innovators. Res. Policy 43, 1109–1133. Aghion, P., Fally,T., Scarpetta,S.,2007. Creditconstraintsas a barrier tothe entryand post-entry growth of firms. Econ. Policy 22 (52), 731–779. Almus,M.,Engel,D.,Prantl,S.,2000.The“MannheimFoundationPanels”oftheCentre for European Economic Research (ZEW). ZEW-Dokumentation. Centre for European Economic Research (ZEW), Mannheim. Andersson,P.,Wadensjö,E.,2007.Dotheunemployedbecomesuccessfulentrepreneurs? Acomparisonbetweentheunemployed,inactiveandwage-earners.Int.J.Manpow.25The subsidy consisted of an amount equivalent to the previous un- employment benefit averaging € 1093 and a lump sum of € 300 paid for nine months and an optional six month lump sum
averaging € 1093 and a lump sum of € 300 paid for nine months and an optional six month lump sum payment extension of which 61.7%benefited, yieldingaverage totalcosts of€13,650 (calculationis basedonresultsin Caliendoetal.,2016).Takingintoaccountthatthesubsidyreceipt was offset against the remaining unemployment benefit entitlement of onaverage 8 months, the “net” costs thus drop to € 4900.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 13
28 (7), 604–626. Autio, E., Kenney, M., Mustar, P., Siegel, D., Wright, M., 2014. Entrepreneurial innova- tion: the importance of context. Res. Policy 43, 1097–1108. Bartelsmann, E., Scarpetta, S., Schivardi, F., 2005. Comparative analysis of firm demo- graphicsandsurvival:evidencefrommicro-levelsourcesinoecdcountries.Ind.Corp. Change 14 (3), 365–391. Behrenz,L.,Delander,L.,Masson,J.,2016.Isstartingabusinessasustainablewayoutof unemployment? Treatment effects of the swedish start-up subsidy. J. LaborRes. 37, 389–411. Bellmann,L.,Caliendo,M.,Tübbicke,S.,2018.Thepost-reformeffectivenessofthenew German start-up subsidy for the unemployed. LABOUR 32 (3), 293–319. Bianchi,M.,Bobba,M.,2013.Liquidity,risk,andoccupationalchoices.Rev.Econ.Stud. 80 (2), 491–511. Blinder, A., 1973. Wage discrimination: reduced form and structural estimates. J. Hum. Resour. 8 (4), 436–455. Bönte,W.,Jarosch,M.,2011.GenderDifferencesinCompetitiveness,RiskTolerance,and otherPersonalityTraits:DotheycontributetotheGenderGapinEntrepreneurship? Schumpeter Discusion Papers. Schumpeter School of Business and Economics, University of Wuppertal, Wuppertal. Caliendo,M.,2016.Start-upsubsidiesfortheunemployed:opportunitiesandlimitations. IZA World of Labor 200, 1–11. Caliendo, M., Fossen, F., Kritikos, A., Wetter, M., 2015. The gender gap in en- trepreneurship:notjustamatterofpersonality.CESifoEcon.Stud.61(1),202–238. Caliendo, M., Hogenacker, J., 2012. The German labor market after the great recession: successful reforms and future challenges. IZA J. Eur. Labor Stud. 1:3, 1–24. Caliendo, M., Hogenacker, J., Künn, S., Wießner, F., 2012. Alte Idee, neues Programm: Der Gründungszuschuss alsNachfolger vonÜberbrückungsgeld und Ich-AG.J. Labour Mark. Res. 45 (2), 99–123. Caliendo, M., Hogenacker, J., Künn, S., Wießner, F., 2015. Subsidized start-ups out of unemployment: a comparison toregular businessstart-ups. Small Bus. Econ.45(1), 165–190. Caliendo, M., Kritikos, A., 2010. Start-Ups by the unemployed:
Small Bus. Econ.45(1), 165–190. Caliendo, M., Kritikos, A., 2010. Start-Ups by the unemployed: characteristics, survival and direct employment effects. Small Bus. Econ. 35 (1), 71–92. https://doi.org/10. 1007/s11187-009-9208-4. Caliendo, M., Kritikos, A., Stier, C., 2020. The Importance of Start-Up Motivation for Entrepreneurial Performance. Working Paper. University of Potsdam, Potsdam. Caliendo,M.,Künn,S.,2011.Start-upsubsidiesfortheunemployed:long-termevidence and effect heterogeneity. J. Public Econ. 95 (3–4), 311–331. Caliendo,M.,Künn,S.,Weißenberger,M.,2016.Personalitytraitsandtheevaluationof start-up subsidies. Eur. Econ. Rev. 86, 87–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. euroecorev.2015.11.008. Cefis,E.,Marsili,O.,2006.Survivor:theroleofinnovationinfirms’survival.Res.Policy 35, 626–641. Coad, A., Rao, R., 2008. Innovation and firm growth in high-tech sectors: aquantile re- gression approach. Res. Policy 37, 633–648. Colombelli, A., Krafft, J., Vivarelli, M., 2016. To be born is not enough: the key role of innovative start-ups. Small Bus. Econ. 47, 277–291. Congregado, E., Golpe, A.A., Carmona, M., 2010. Is it a good policy topromote self- employmentforjobcreation?EvidencefromSpain.J.PolicyModel.32(6),828–842. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpolmod.2010.09.001. Duhautois,R.,Redor,D.,Desiage,L.,2015.Longtermeffectofpublicsubisidiesonstart- up survivaland economic performance:an empirical study with French data. Rev. Écon. Ind. 149 (1), 11–41. Engel, D., Keilbach, M., 2007. Firm-level implications of early stage venture capital in- vestment-anempiricalinvestigation.J.Empir.Finance14(2),150–167. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.jempfin.2006.03.004. Evans, D., Jovanovic, B., 1989. An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under li- quidity constraints. J. Political Econ. 97, 808–827. FederalStatisticalOffice,2012.VerdiensteundArbeitskosten,Arbeitnehmerverdienste3. Vierteljahr 2012, Fachserie 16, Reihe 2.1. Wiesbaden. Federal Statistical Office, 2013. Verdienste und
2012, Fachserie 16, Reihe 2.1. Wiesbaden. Federal Statistical Office, 2013. Verdienste und Arbeitskosten, Nettoverdienste, Modellrechnung 2012, Fachserie 16, Reihe 2.5. Wiesbaden. Federal Statistical Office, 2014. Verbraucherpreisindizes für Deutschland. Wiesbaden. Fritsch, M., Schroeter, A., 2011. Why does the effect of new business formation differ across regions? Small Bus. Econ. 36 (4),383–400. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187- 009-9256-9. Griliches,Z.,1990.Patentstatisticsaseconomicindicators:asurvey.J.Econ.Lit.28(4), 1661–1707. Hall, B.H., Jaffe, A.B., Trajtenberg, M., 2001. The NBER patent citations andData File: Lessons, insights and methodological tools. Working Paper. NBER. Holtz-Eakin,D.,Joulfaian,D.,Rosen,H.S.,1994.Entrepreneurialdecisionsandliquidity constraints. RAND J. Econ.25, 334–347. Hombert,J.,Schoar,A.,Sraer,D.,Thesmar,D.,2014.CanUnemploymentInsuranceSpur Entrepreneurial Activity? Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), Cambridge, MAhttps://doi.org/10.3386/w20717. Hvide, H., Møen, J.,2007. Liquidity Constraints and Entrepreneurial Performance. Discussion Paper. Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR), London. Jovanovic, B., 1982. Selection and the evolution of industry. Econometrica 50 (3), 649–670. Lerner, J., 2010. The future of public efforts to boost entrepreneurship and venturecapital. Small Bus. Econ. 35, 255–264. Meager,N.,1996.Fromunemployementtoself-employement:labourmarketpoliciesfor business start-up. In: Schmidt, G., O’Reilly, J., Schömann, K. (Eds.), International Handbook of Labour Market Policy and Evaluation. Edward Elgar, pp. 489–519. Millán,J.M.,Congregado,E.,Román,C.,2012.Determinantsofself-employmentsurvival in Europe. Small Bus. Econ. 38 (2), 231–258. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-010- 9260-0. Millán, J.M., Congregado, E., Román, C., 2014. Entrepreneurship persistence with and without personnel: the role of human capital and previous unemployment. Int. Entrep. Manag. J. 10, 187–206. Millán, J.M.,
role of human capital and previous unemployment. Int. Entrep. Manag. J. 10, 187–206. Millán, J.M., Congregado, E., Román, C., 2014. Persistencein entrepreneurship and its implicationsfortheeuropeanentrepreneurialpromotionpolicy.J.PolicyModel.36, 83–106. Moser, P., 2016. Patents and innovation in economic history. Annu. Rev. Econ. 8, 241–258. Nanda,R.,2008.CostofExternalFinanceandSelectionintoEntrepreneurship.Working Paper. Harvard Business School, Boston, MA. Niefert,2005.PatentingBehaviourandEmploymentGrowthinGermanStart-upFirms:A Panel Data Analysis. Discussion Paper. Centre for European Economic Research(ZEW), Mannheim. Niefert, M., 2010. Characteristics anddeterminants of start-ups from unemployment: evidence from German micro data. J. Small Bus. Entrep. 23 (3), 409–429. Oaxaca,R.,1973.Male-femalewagedifferentialsinurbanlabormarkets.Int.Econ.Rev. 14 (3), 693–709. O’Leary,C.J.,1999.PromotingSelfEmploymentAmongtheUnemployedinHungaryand Poland. Working Paper. W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, MI. Paulson, A.L., Townsend, R.M., Karaivanov, A., 2006. Distinguishing limited liability from moral hazard in a model of entrepreneurship. J. Political Econ.114 (1), 100–144. Pellegrino, G., Piva, M., MarcoVivarelli, 2012. Young firms and innovation: a micro- econometric analysis.Struct. Change Econ. Dyn. 23, 329–340. Perry,G.,2006.AreBusinessStart-UpSubsidiesEffectivefortheUnemployed:Evaluation of Enterprise Allowance. Working Paper. Auckland University of Technology, Auckland. Petermann, S., Piorkowsky, M.-B., 2013. Selbstständige in Deutschland 2008–2012 mit einemExkursüberHaushalts-Unternehmens-Komplexe.DerSelbstständigen-Monitor mit dem vollständigen Datensatz des Mikrozensus des Statistischen Bundesamtes. Report. Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, Bonn. Pfeiffer, F., Reize, F., 2000. Business start-ups by the unemployed - an econometric analysis based on firm data. Labour Econ. 7 (5),629–663.
by the unemployed - an econometric analysis based on firm data. Labour Econ. 7 (5),629–663. Pissarides,F.,1999.Islackoffundsthemainobstacletogrowth?EBRD’sexperiencewith small-andmedium-sizedbusinessesinCentralandEasternEurope.J.Bus.Ventur.14 (5–6), 519–539. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0883-9026(98)00027-5. Rodriguez-Planas, N., Jacob, B., 2010. Evaluating active labor market programs in Romania. Empir. Econ. 38 (1), 65–84. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00181-009-0256-z. Román, C., Congregado, E., Millán, J.M., 2011. Dependent self-employment as a way to evade employment protection legislation. Small Bus. Econ. 37, 363–392. Román, C., Congregado, E., Millán, J.M., 2013. Start-up incentives: entrepreneurship policyoractivelabourmarketprogramme?J.Bus.Ventur.28(1),151–175. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.01.004. Rotger, G.P., Gørtz, M., Storey, D.J., 2012. Assessing the effectiveness of guided pre- paration for new venture creation and performance: theory and practice. J. Bus. Ventur. 27 (4), 506–521. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.01.003. Santarelli, E., Vivarelli, M., 2007. Entrepreneurship and the process of firms’ entry, sur- vival and growth. Ind. Corp. Change 16 (3),455–488. Schäfer, D., Talavera, O., Weir, C., 2011. Entrepreneurship, windfall gains andfinancial constraints: evidence from Germany. Econ.Model. 28 (5), 2174–2180. Shane, S., 2003. A General Theory of Entrepreneurship: The Individual-opportunity Nexus. New Horizons in Entrepreneurship Edward Elgar Publishing. Shane, S., 2009. Why encouraging more people to become entrepreneurs is bad public policy. Small Bus. Econ. 33 (2), 141–149. Sinning, M., Hahn, M., Bauer, T.K., 2008. The Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition for non- linear regression models. Stata J. 8 (4), 480–492. Storey, D., 2003. Entrepreneurship, small and medium sized enterprises andpublic po- licies. In: Acs,Z., Audretsch, D. (Eds.), Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research. Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 473–511.
D. (Eds.), Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research. Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 473–511. Welter,F.,Baker,T.,Audretsch,D.,Gartner,W.,2017.Everydayenterpreneurship-acall for entrepreneurship research to embrace entrepreneurial diversity. Entrep. Theory Pract. 41 (3), 311–321. Wiklund,J.,Shepherd,D.,2003.Aspiringfor,andachievinggrowth:themoderatingrole of resources and opportunities. J. Manag. Stud. 40 (8), 1919–1941. Wolff,J.,Nivorozhkin,A.,Bernhard,S.,2016.Youcangoyourownway!thelong-term effectivenessofaself-employmentprogrammeforwelfarerecipientsinGermany.Int.J. Soc. Welf.25 (2),136–148. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijsw.12176. Wooldridge,J.M.,2002.EconometricAnalysisofCrossSectionandPanelData.TheMIT Press. Wren, C., Storey, D.J., 2002. Evaluating the effect of soft business support upon firm performance. Oxf. Econ. Pap. 54 (2), 334–365.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 14
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Research Policy journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/respol Catching up or lagging behind? The long-term business and innovation potential of subsidized start-ups out of unemployment☆ Marco Caliendo⁎,a,c, Steffen Künnb,c, Martin Weissenbergerd aUniversityofPotsdam,DIWBerlin,andIABNuremberg,Germany bMaastrichtUniversityandROA,theNetherlands cIZABonn,Germany dUniversityofPotsdam,Germany ARTICLE INFO Keywords: EntrepreneurshipStart-up subsidies Business growth InnovationJob creation JELclassification: L26 M13 J68ABSTRACT Fromanactivelabormarketpolicyperspective,start-upsubsidiesforunemployedindividualsareveryeffectivein improving long-term labor market outcomes for participants. From a business perspective, however, the assess- mentofthesepublicprogramsislessclearsincetheymightattractindividualswithlowentrepreneurialabilities and produce businesses with low survival rates and little contribution to job creation, economic growth, and innovation.Inthispaper,weusearichdatasettocompareparticipantsofaGermanstart-upsubsidyprogram for unemployed individuals to a group of regular founders who started from non-unemployment and did notreceivethesubsidy.Thedataallowsustoanalyzetheirbusinessperformanceupuntil40monthsafterbusiness formation. We find that formerly subsidized founders lag behind not only in survival and job creation, but especially also in innovation activities. The gaps in these business outcomes are relatively constant or evenwidening over time. Hence, we do not see any indication of catching up in the longer run. While the gap in survivalcanbeentirelyexplainedbyinitialdifferencesinobservablestart-upcharacteristics,thegapinbusiness development remains and seems to be the result of restricted access to capital as well as differential
remains and seems to be the result of restricted access to capital as well as differential businessstrategiesanddynamics.ConsideringtheseconflictingresultsfortheassessmentofthesubsidyprogramfromanALMPandbusinessperspective,policymakersneedtocarefullyweighthecostsandbenefitsofsuchastrategyto find the right policy mix. 1. Introduction Thecurrent debateintheentrepreneurship literaturequestionsthe common wisdom that an increase in start-up activities automatically results in economic and employment growth (see, e.g., Colombellietal.,2016).Ithasbeenwelldocumentedthatamongthose new businesses who start, many fail, and among those who survive, onlyasmallfractionintroducesnewinnovationsandspurssustainable employment growth. As a consequence, the academic as well as poli- ticaldiscussionhasshiftedfromthe quantitytothequalityofstart-ups.In this context, the question arises as to whether existing policies pro- moting a broad entry into entrepreneurship are effective or should ra- ther be targeted towards the stimulation of innovative start-ups (Acs et al., 2016; Lerner, 2010; Shane, 2009). In this light, particularly the promotionofstart-upsoutofunemploymentaresuspectedofproducing onlymarginalbusinesses thatdo nothaveany significantcontribution to productivity, innovation, and economic growth. The major concern with start-up subsidies in general is based on an occupational choice model predicting an adverse selection where the subsidy attracts less ableindividualstoentrepreneurshipduetoloweropportunitycostsand https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2020.104053 Received 15 June 2020; Accepted 15 June 2020☆The authors thank Alessandra Colombelli, Alexander Kritikos, Lutz Bellmann, Stefan Tübbicke, the guest editors and three anonymous reviewers for helpful commentsandsuggestions.WefurtherthanktheInstituteofEmploymentResearch(IAB)forcooperationandinstitutionalsupportwithintheresearchproject1755. Marco Caliendo is grateful for financial support from the German Research Foundation --- program are likely to cause trade-off effects between effectivenessasan activelabormarketpolicy andasabusinesspolicy.For instance,toimprovetheaverageperformanceofsubsidizedbusinesses,acceptance into the subsidy program could be combined with better screening or morerestrictive selectionon certain (observable)founder and start-up characteristics to identify and approve only the most promising business proposals. One downside of this approach is that while observable start-up characteristics entirely explain the survival gaps, they contribute little to the explanation of the shortcomings in business growth. Thus further investigations and a careful im- plementation would be necessary. Furthermore, this approach would likely result in higher rejection rates of those unemployed nascent en- trepreneurs who need the subsidy the most, and thus it would likely yield increasing deadweight effects. Also, this approach implies lower accesstothesubsidyfordisadvantagedindividualswithlessfavorable characteristics, who, in turn, derive the highest labor market benefits from participation (Caliendo and Künn, 2011). To spur job creation, economic growth, and innovation nascent founders and in particular unemployed nascent founders might need additional encouragement and advice during the pre or early start-up phasetoimproveandmaturetheirbusinessideaandplanforandfactor in future business growth. In this sense, additional soft support mea- sures like coaching,counseling, mentoring, or training (accompanying the subsidy) during the pre or early start-up phase might improve business potential and long-term development (see, e.g., Rotger et al., 2012; Wren and Storey, 2002). An additional issue that might hinderbusinessgrowthforformerlyunemployedsubsidizedfoundersseemsto behigherrestrictionstoaccesscapital.Sincewecannotclearlyidentify whethertheyaremainlysupply-ordemand-driven,furtherresearchto investigate this topic more closely is necessary. On a final note, it should also be kept in --- investigate this topic more closely is necessary. On a final note, it should also be kept in mind that in micro level studies on an individual ALMP or business perspective, general equili- brium effects such as displacement or crowding out usually cannot be takenintoaccount.Althoughevidenceontheseeffectswouldbehighly informativeforpolicymakersaswell,empiricalanalysesonthemacro effects of start-up subsidy programs on aggregated (un)employment and growth are very rare due to severe data limitations. Nevertheless, potential displacement effects of any business support measure should also always be carefully considered in this context. Declaration of Competing Interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influ- ence the work reported in this paper. Supplementary material Supplementarymaterialassociatedwiththisarticlecanbefound,in the online version, at 10.1016/j.respol.2020.104053. References Acs, Z., Åstebro, T., Audretsch, D., Robinson, D.T., 2016. Public policy to promote en- trepreneurship: a call to arms. Small Bus. Econ. 47 (1), 35–51. https://doi.org/10. 1007/s11187-016-9712-2. Agarwal,R.,Shah,S.K.,2014.Knowledgesourcesofentrepreneurship:firmformationby academic,user and employee innovators. Res. Policy 43, 1109–1133. Aghion, P., Fally,T., Scarpetta,S.,2007. Creditconstraintsas a barrier tothe entryand post-entry growth of firms. Econ. Policy 22 (52), 731–779. Almus,M.,Engel,D.,Prantl,S.,2000.The“MannheimFoundationPanels”oftheCentre for European Economic Research (ZEW). ZEW-Dokumentation. Centre for European Economic Research (ZEW), Mannheim. Andersson,P.,Wadensjö,E.,2007.Dotheunemployedbecomesuccessfulentrepreneurs? Acomparisonbetweentheunemployed,inactiveandwage-earners.Int.J.Manpow.25The subsidy consisted of an amount equivalent to the previous un- employment benefit averaging € 1093 and a lump sum of € 300 paid for nine months and an optional six month lump sum
Marco Caliendo is grateful for financial support from the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG, project number: 407087322). A Supplementary Appendix is available online at 10.1016/j.respol.2020.104053. ⁎Corresponding author at: University of Potsdam, Chair of Empirical Economics, August-Bebel-Str. 89, 14482 Potsdam, Germany. E-mailaddresses: caliendo@uni-potsdam.de (M. Caliendo), s.kuenn@maastrichtuniversity.nl (S. Künn), weissenberger@empwifo.uni-potsdam.de (M. Weissenberger).Research Policy 49 (2020) 104053 Available online 10 July 2020 0048-7333/ © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. T
reduced entry barriers (self-selection view, see Hvide and Møen, 2007; Nanda, 2008).1This might be even more pronounced if the subsidy is specificallytargetedtowardsunemployedindividualswhoalreadyface more severe restrictions with respect to the availability or access to human, social and financial capital (Agarwal and Shah, 2014; Autio etal.,2014;Caliendoetal.,2015b).Asaconsequence,subsidizedstart- upscanbeexpectedtounderperformfroma businessperspective.Thisis particularly a concern if subsidized businesses additionally crowd out incumbent firms or regular start-ups due to their temporary artificial cost advantages (see, e.g., Meager, 1996; Santarelli and Vivarelli, 2007).Therefore,theentrepreneurshipliteraturesuggestsarethinkingoftheconceptofstart-upsubsidiesfortheunemployedduetothehigh costs involved. For instance, financial resources might be used instead to support innovative start-ups or shaping local innovation systems triggering entrepreneurial activities with high growth potential (Colombellietal.,2016;Congregadoetal.,2010;Lerner,2010;Román et al., 2013; Santarelli and Vivarelli, 2007). Albeit this critical view of the entrepreneurship literature on start- up subsidies, many industrialized countries offer financial support to unemployed individuals encouraging them to start their own busi- nesses,andhencetoescapeunemployment,aspartoftheiractivelabor marketpolicy(ALMP).Thesubsidiesareexpectedtoremove,reduceor compensate for disadvantages unemployed founders face in human, financial and/or social capital as compared to non-unemployed foun- dersandactasamechanismtoinsurethemagainsttheriskofloworno income during the initial start-up phase. A large body of empirical evidence shows the effectiveness of start-up subsidies to sustainably integrateformerlyunemployedindividualsinto(self-)employmentand improvetheirearningprofiles(see Caliendo,2016,foranoverview).As a consequence, the policy can be considered highly effective on theindividual level from an ALMP --- market, income, the contribution to growth and job creation, and deadweight effects. Most studies focus only on a few dimensions, and most are descriptive rather than causal studies.Overall,thecausalstudiesconfirmtheeffectivenessofstart-up subsidiestosustainablyintegrateformerlyunemployedindividualsinto (self-)employmentandimprovetheirearningprofiles.Moreover,ithas been shown that deadweight effects occur, but at a much lower scale thangenerallyexpected(CaliendoandKritikos,2010).Hence,intotalit can be concluded that start-up subsidies can be considered successful from an ALMP perspective. 2.2. Start-upsubisidesfromabusinessperspective However, offering a subsidy might trigger some negative ex- ternalities such as adverse selection and moral hazard. Adverse selec- tion occurs because the subsidy reduces the costs for entering self-em- ployment, allowing less able individuals to self-select into entrepreneurship. Nanda(2008) andHvideandMøen(2007) showthat reducing liquidity constraints drives adverse selection into en-trepreneurship, and Millán et al. (2014a) andMillán et al. (2014b) show that starting self-employment from unemployment increases therisk of re-entering unemployment. They conclude that subsidies for unemployed job seekers might contribute to an adverse selection pro- blem. 6In addition to adverse selection, the subsidy payment might induce moral hazard, predicting that individuals reduce their effortduringsubsidyreceiptasthey–incontrasttonon-subsidizedbusinesses – do not have to take the cost, i.e., the risk of no or low income. 7The negative externalities can be expected to be even more pronounced ifthe subsidy is specifically targeted towards unemployed individuals whoalreadyfacemoresevererestrictionswithrespecttohuman,social and financial capital (as discussed above). In addition, the entrepreneurship literature has recently began to discuss the importance of the “knowledge context”, from which start- ups occur, for innovation and growth (see
a consequence, the policy can be considered highly effective on theindividual level from an ALMP perspective, most likely explaining the intensive use of this policy by many industrialized countries. While strong evidence exists supporting the ALMP perspective, empirical results for start-up subsidies for the unemployed on the business perspective are very scarce. Using aggregate data on public expenditures on start-up subsidies, Millán et al. (2012) and Román et al. (2013) show a positive impact on business survival and negative evidence with respect to employment growth among sub- sidized start-ups out of unemployment. Based on individual data, AnderssonandWadensjö(2007) andCaliendoetal.(2015b) providea comparison between subsidized and non-subsidized start-ups out ofunemployment. Both studies find opposing results and face severe re- strictions limiting the validity of the findings. On the one hand, Andersson and Wadensjö (2007) shows better performance of sub- sidized start-ups but it remains unclear whether this finding reflects acream-skimming selection effect. On the other hand, Caliendo et al. (2015b) provide indeed support for the low-growth hypothesis among subsidized start-ups out of unemployment but has the limitation that the result is likely to be influenced by the subsidy payment itself, which expired only a few months before measurement oftheoutcomes.Mostimportantly,neitherofthesestudieswasableto lookattheinnovativebehaviourofstart-upsoutofunemploymentina long-term perspective. To contribute to this debate and fill this research gap, our paper provides a comparison up to 40 months after business formation be- tween subsidized start-ups out of unemployment and non-subsidized start-ups out of non-unemployment in Germany in terms of various business outcomes, such as employment growth, business expansion and innovative behaviour. Individuals in both groups started theirbusinesses inthe first quarterof2009. The subsidized businesses werestarted out of --- unemployed individuals to start a business have become common instruments of ALMP in many developedcountries.Butdespitethisrecentgrowthinpopularity,they are increasingly becoming subject to criticism. From an active labor marketpolicyperspective, start-up subsidies for unemployed individualsare very effective in improving long-term labor market outcomes for participants. From a business perspective, however, the assessment of thesepublicprogramsislessclearandhardevidenceislargelymissing. Our paper provides first evidence on the longer term business andin- novation potential of start-ups from unemployment. Although our re-sultsaregeneratedbasedonGermany,itislikelythattheyalsoapplyto other industrialized countries given the high similarity in terms of Table 4 Additional decomposition analysis of employment gaps between formerly subsidized and regular founders. Specification Raw gap (8) (9) (10) (11) A.Outcomevariable: At least one employee in wave 2 Unexplained −0.220*** −0.188*** −0.161*** −0.102* −0.083 Explained −0.033 −0.061 −0.115** −0.134*** % Explained 15.1 27.5 53.1 61.6 Number of obs. 974 974 974 974 974 B.Controlvariables: Start-up characteristicsa: (1)Personalcharacteristics √ √ √ √ (2)Humancapital √ √ √ √ (3)Intergen.transmissions √ √ √ √ (4)Labormarkethistory √ √ √ √ (5)Regionalinformation √ √ √ √ (6)Start-upmotives √ √ √ √ (7)Businesscharacteristics √ √ √ √ Additional business indicators in wave 2: (9)Accesstocapitalsincestart-upb√ √ Wave 1 outcome:(10)Atleastoneemployee c√ √ Total number of control variables 70 72 71 73 Note:ReportedareestimationresultsofaBlinder-Oaxacaprobitdecompositionforsubsidizedbusinessfounders(outofunemployment)asthebasegroupusingthe Statapackage nldecompose (Sinningetal.,2008).Fordetails,seeTableA.2intheSupplementaryAppendix.Standarderrorsarebootstrappedusing499replications. Outcomes are weighted for panel attrition. ***/**/* indicates statistical significance at the 1/5/10% level. aA detailed list and summary descriptives of
started theirbusinesses inthe first quarterof2009. The subsidized businesses werestarted out of unemployment and received the “Gründungszuschuss,” whichconsistsofamonthlypaymentequivalenttotheindividual’slastunemploymentbenefitplusalumpsumof€300tocoversocialsecurity costsforaninitialperiodof9monthsandthepossibilitytoextendthe lump-sum payment for another six months. Germany is exceptionally suited for this analysis because policies promoting entrepreneurship amongunemployedindividualshavealongtraditiongoingbacktothe introduction of the bridging allowance in 1986 (see Caliendo and Kritikos,2010,formoredetails).Furthermore,thescaleofsuchpolicies in Germany has been considerable, accounting for roughly between 40% and 60% of all full-time start-ups in Germany between 2006 and 2011 (Caliendo et al., 2015b). 2In this sense, our study is also a con- tribution to the examination of “everyday entrepreneurship” in thespiritofWelteretal.(2017).Thedatasetisalongitudinalextensionof thedatausedby Caliendoetal.(2015b) andcontainsnotonlydetailed information on an extensive list of start-up characteristics but also in- cludes business performance measures in various dimensions, thus al- lowing for an in-depth analysis of business development over time. Based on this data set, we provide evidence on the following as- pects: First, we investigate whether initially subsidized businesses can successfullysurviveandthriveinthemarketevenwhenthesubsidyhad expiredmorethantwoyearsearlier.Second,wecomparethebusiness performance as reflected by income, job creation, and investment ac- tivitybetweenformerlysubsidizedandregularlyfoundedbusinesses40 months after business formation. Third, we are the first to provide evidence on innovative behaviour of subsidized start-ups from un- employment in a long-term perspective and in comparison to regular start-ups. And fourth, we further investigate possible reasons for the persistentgapsintheseoutcomesbetweenthetwogroups.Wefindthat 40 months after --- start-ups out of non-unemployment. Based on different data sources, they drew representative random samples of subsidized and non-sub- sidized founders who started a full-time business in the first quarter of 2009 in Germany. The cohort of subsidized founders consists of in- itially unemployed individuals who received the start-up subsidy from theFederalEmploymentAgency,whilenon-subsidizedstart-upsconsist of founders who were not unemployed directly prior to start-up and consequentlydidnotreceivethesubsidy(see Caliendoetal.,2015b,for details on data construction). The selected business founders were initially surveyed around 19 months after start-up (wave 1) on an extensive list of start-upcharacteristics,socio-demographics,previouslabormarketexperiences, 8Thisprogramreplaceditstwopredecessorprogramsthatessentiallydiffered intermsofsubsidylengthandamount(see Caliendoetal.,2012;Caliendoand(footnotecontinued) Kritikos, 2010, for a description). 9InGermany,everyindividualwhohasbeeninemploymentsubjecttosocial securityforatleastoneoutofthelastthreeyearsiseligibleforunemployment benefitI.Theamountofthebenefitconsistsof60%(67%withchildren)forthe lastnetwageandisbasicallypaidforamaximumperiodof12months,withthe exception of older individuals (see Caliendo and Hogenacker, 2012). 10Without program participation, the individuals would lose their un- employment benefit entitlement given that they start their own business andhence work full-time. The subsidy receipt was offset against the remainingunemployment benefit I entitlement, however. 11We find that 61.7% of the subsidized business founders in our sample re- ceived the subsidy for 15 months. Out of those without subsidy prolongation,9% reported that the application was rejected, 33% did not apply because themonthly amount of 300 Euro was not worth the administrative burden asso- ciatedwiththeapplicationprocess,18%didnotknowaboutthe prolongation and 40% reported other reasons. 12Meanwhile, a major restrictive reform of the --- prolongation and 40% reported other reasons. 12Meanwhile, a major restrictive reform of the SUS at the end of 2011 has reduced SUS entry numbers substantially (see Bellmann et al., 2018, for de- tails).M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 4
reasons for the persistentgapsintheseoutcomesbetweenthetwogroups.Wefindthat 40 months after start-up, formerly subsidized founders lag behind regularbusinessesintermsofallobservedbusinessoutcomes.Thegap in business survival can entirely be explained by initial differences inobservable start-up characteristics (such as personal characteristics, business sector, and start-up capital), while the remaining gaps seem mainly to be driven by restricted access to capital and differences in business strategies and dynamics. Theremainderofthispaperisorganizedasfollows:In Section2,we provideatheoreticalfoundationforourempiricalanalysis.In Section3, wepresenttheinstitutionalsettingsofthestart-upsubsidy,describethedata as well as the estimation sample, and discuss panel attrition. Fol- lowing that, in the empirical part, we compare the business develop- mentsandperformancesbetweenthetwogroups(Section4)beforewe explore reasons for the revealed differences (Section 5). After that,we summarize our findings and discuss policy implications in Section 6. 2. Theoretical considerations TheaimofthisSectionistoprovideatheoreticalfoundationforthe paper.Therefore,westartwithadiscussionofstart-upsubsidiesforthe unemployedfromanALMPperspective.Thisincludesthepresentation ofthemainideaandreasoningbehindsuchsubsidiesandalsoincludes abriefsummaryontheireffectivenesswithrespecttotheintegrationof unemployed job seekers into the labor market. In a second step, we discussexpectationswithrespecttothedevelopmentofthesubsidized start-ups from a business perspective. We focus on economic con- siderations of potential mechanisms triggered by such a subsidy (ad- verseselectionormoralhazard),addressthekeyroleofstartingoutof unemployment (knowledge context), and discuss how this potentially affects business development. 1The competing experimentation view claims that individuals only have in- complete information about their entrepreneurial abilities ex ante and learn about them as they operate their
about their entrepreneurial abilities ex ante and learn about them as they operate their businesses (Hombert et al.,2014; Jovanovic, 1982).Thesubsidythuslowersentrybarriersformoreconstrainedindividuals but does not induce a negative selection.2The importance of the start-up subsidy program in Germany has sharply declined as the result of a restrictive reform at the end of 2011 (seeBellmann et al.,2018, for details).M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 2 --- personality influences the decision to become self-employed andCaliendo et al. (2015a) highlight important gender differences in this regard).6In a different context, Román et al. (2011) also show how the existence of publicpolicies,i.e.employmentprotection,mightleadtoadverseselectionintoentrepreneurship. 7Thisreliesontheexistenceofasymmetricinformation,i.e.individualswho applyforthesubsidyhavemoreinformationthantheinstitutionthatpaysthesubsidy. Once the subsidy is approved, the institution has no influence on the effortof the applicant. See Paulsonet al. (2006) asan examplefor how moral hazard induces financial constraints on start-ups.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 3
2.1. Start-upsubsidiesfromanALMPperspective The main aim of ALMP is to assist unemployed individuals during job search by removing existing disadvantages in education, work ex- perienceorproductivitypreventingatransitiontoemployment.Inthis context, a start-up subsidy is a financial support to unemployed job seekers in order to enable them to start their own business and hence escape unemployment. The existence of start-up subsidies for the un- employed relies on the assumption that nascent entrepreneurs among the unemployed face disadvantages compared to regular business founders.Suchdisadvantagesmightexistindifferentdimensions.First, the unemployed are likely to face financial constraints with respect to access to capital compared to the non-unemployed population: They tendtohavelowerfinancialmeans(personallyandwithinfamily),and are likely to face severe credit constraints3as well as being dis- criminated by capital markets (see Meager, 1996; Perry, 2006).4 Second,unemployedindividualsmightfaceaknowledgeshortageora depreciation of their start-up specific human and social capital during unemployment(PfeifferandReize,2000).Thisparticularlyincludesthe lack of experience and knowledge with respect to markets, operations and technology, which are all driving innovation (Agarwal and Shah, 2014;Autioetal.,2014).Moreover,thelackofemploymentexperience also induces disadvantages in terms of business and social networks, i.e., contact to potential customers, business partners, or knowledge spillovers from colleagues (Niefert, 2010). Third, due to imperfect in- formation, unemployed individuals primarily focus on dependent em- ploymentandtendtoignoreself-employment(Storey,2003,referstoit as “lack-of-awareness”).5Finally, start-ups out of unemployment are more likely necessity start-ups. Unemployed individuals decide to be-comeself-employedowingtomissingemploymentalternatives.In this context,Shane (2003) argues that unemployed individuals have less access to information
this context,Shane (2003) argues that unemployed individuals have less access to information concerning business opportunities and lower opportunity costs, and consequently, they also realize less valuable businessideas,introducelessinnovationandhenceearnsmallerprofits. The start-up subsidy aims at removing such barriers for the un- employed by providing financial assistance. Nascent unemployed en- trepreneurs are expected to have fewer resources available – than regular business founders – to prepare the business start-up. The sub- sidyisexpectedtocompensateforthesedisadvantages.Moreover,ina recentstudy BianchiandBobba(2013) showthatinsurance(insteadof credit) constraints are mostly binding for nascent entrepreneurs, i.e.,the (financial) risk of failure hinders nascent entrepreneurs. In this sense,thesubsidycanbeconsideredtoactasamechanismtoinsurethe unemployed against the risk of low or no income during the start-up period, stimulating nascent entrepreneurs among the unemployed to start a business. However, paying a subsidy is also vulnerable to deadweight effects in the sense that it could be exploited by nascent entrepreneurs who would start a business even without the subsidy. Caliendo (2016) summarizes a large number of empirical studies on such schemes in different countries such as Australia, Finland, France,Germany, New Zealand, Romania, Sweden, the UK and the US (basedonBehrenz et al., 2016; Caliendo and Künn, 2011; Caliendo et al., 2016; Duhautois et al., 2015; O’Leary, 1999; Rodriguez-Planas and Jacob, 2010; Wolff et al., 2016, amongst others). While the key prin- cipleofthesubsidiesisverysimilaracrosscountries,theydifferinsome institutional settings such as amount, duration, and eligibility criteria andalsointhewayhowsuccessismeasured.Themostcommonsuccess measure is the survival rate; others include re-integration of un- employed workers into the labor market, income, the contribution to growth and job creation, and deadweight effects. Most studies --- selection,moralhazard)astriggeredbythesubsidypayment,aswellas thedisadvantagedstartingconditionsfacedbyunemployedindividuals (weaker knowledge context), it is likely that subsidized unemployed business founders start marginal businesses that do not have any sig- nificant contribution to productivity, innovation, or economic growth (Acs et al., 2016; Shane, 2009). Empirical support on this hypothesis is very scarce. Using data on EU-15 countries, Millán et al. (2012) find that higher national public expendituresonstart-upsubsidiesforunemployedindividualsdecreaseexit rates for self-employed individuals who had entered self-employ- ment from unemployment. They conclude that overall the subsidies might not only increase entry into self-employment but also equalize business survival chances of formerly unemployed and formerly non- unemployedbusinessfounders.Inarelatedstudy, Románetal.(2013) findthathighernationalsubsidyexpendituresincreasetransitionsfromunemployment to solopreneurship but do not affect transitions to new businesses with additional job creation, emphasizing the low growth potentialsofsubsidizedbusinessesoutofunemployment.Bothofthese studiesarebasedonmacroindicatorsforstart-upsubsidyexpenditures onanationallevelandthusindirectlyalsoreflectcross-countryeffects. The empirical evidence basedon puremicro data iseven more scarce. Andersson and Wadensjö (2007) find that in Sweden individuals en- tering entrepreneurship from unemployment with a subsidy performbetter than unemployed individuals not receiving thesubsidy in terms of income and, to a lesser extent, with respect to hiring employees, conditional on a small set of basic controls. But they perform worse than formerly dependently employed founders. It remains unclear, however, whether this finding reflects the subsidy effect of additional helporacream-skimmingselectioneffectwherecaseworkersapprove those candidates for subsidy receipt who display the highest en- trepreneurial potential. There is in
importance of the “knowledge context”, from which start- ups occur, for innovation and growth (see Agarwal and Shah, 2014; Autio et al., 2014). The literature differentiates between employee, academic and user entrepreneurship. Employees can build on knowl- edge gained from firm environment on technology, markets and op- erations. This can be turned into innovative entrepreneurship. Aca- demics rely on scientific knowledge to introduce product innovation, andusersofexistingcommercialproductsexploittheiruserknowledge to innovate new features or functionalities. In any case, the context from which start-ups are realized plays a key role in determining in- novativeentrepreneurshipandgrowth.Inthisregard,itcanbeargued that unemployed job seekers start, on average, from a weaker knowl- edge context – in contrast to non-subsidized business start-ups – be- cause they are neither employed nor associated with an academic in- stitution. The weaker context and the resulting lack of knowledge predicts lower innovation and growth trajectories. Given the potential occurrence of negative externalities (adverse3Generalevidenceonhowcreditconstraintsrestrictthestart-upratecanbe found in Evans and Jovanovic (1989), Holtz-Eakin et al. (1994) and Schäfer et al. (2011). 4For instance, unemployed individuals are more likely to have bad debt re- cords, less wealth and less human capital, thus reducing their probability of receiving credit. Banks tend to screen individuals with respect to their human capital in the sense that it is negatively correlated with credit default risk,which renders individuals with higher human capital more capable and thusbetter access to credit. 5The experience of labor market failure due to job loss reduces individuals self-confidence, making them less likely to consider self-employment as an al-ternative to dependent employment (Bönte and Jarosch (2011) show that personality influences the decision to become self-employed andCaliendo et al. (2015a) highlight --- 28 (7), 604–626. Autio, E., Kenney, M., Mustar, P., Siegel, D., Wright, M., 2014. Entrepreneurial innova- tion: the importance of context. Res. Policy 43, 1097–1108. Bartelsmann, E., Scarpetta, S., Schivardi, F., 2005. Comparative analysis of firm demo- graphicsandsurvival:evidencefrommicro-levelsourcesinoecdcountries.Ind.Corp. Change 14 (3), 365–391. Behrenz,L.,Delander,L.,Masson,J.,2016.Isstartingabusinessasustainablewayoutof unemployment? Treatment effects of the swedish start-up subsidy. J. LaborRes. 37, 389–411. Bellmann,L.,Caliendo,M.,Tübbicke,S.,2018.Thepost-reformeffectivenessofthenew German start-up subsidy for the unemployed. LABOUR 32 (3), 293–319. Bianchi,M.,Bobba,M.,2013.Liquidity,risk,andoccupationalchoices.Rev.Econ.Stud. 80 (2), 491–511. Blinder, A., 1973. Wage discrimination: reduced form and structural estimates. J. Hum. Resour. 8 (4), 436–455. Bönte,W.,Jarosch,M.,2011.GenderDifferencesinCompetitiveness,RiskTolerance,and otherPersonalityTraits:DotheycontributetotheGenderGapinEntrepreneurship? Schumpeter Discusion Papers. Schumpeter School of Business and Economics, University of Wuppertal, Wuppertal. Caliendo,M.,2016.Start-upsubsidiesfortheunemployed:opportunitiesandlimitations. IZA World of Labor 200, 1–11. Caliendo, M., Fossen, F., Kritikos, A., Wetter, M., 2015. The gender gap in en- trepreneurship:notjustamatterofpersonality.CESifoEcon.Stud.61(1),202–238. Caliendo, M., Hogenacker, J., 2012. The German labor market after the great recession: successful reforms and future challenges. IZA J. Eur. Labor Stud. 1:3, 1–24. Caliendo, M., Hogenacker, J., Künn, S., Wießner, F., 2012. Alte Idee, neues Programm: Der Gründungszuschuss alsNachfolger vonÜberbrückungsgeld und Ich-AG.J. Labour Mark. Res. 45 (2), 99–123. Caliendo, M., Hogenacker, J., Künn, S., Wießner, F., 2015. Subsidized start-ups out of unemployment: a comparison toregular businessstart-ups. Small Bus. Econ.45(1), 165–190. Caliendo, M., Kritikos, A., 2010. Start-Ups by the unemployed:
candidates for subsidy receipt who display the highest en- trepreneurial potential. There is in principle so far only one study, by Caliendoetal.(2015b),thatdirectlycomparessubsidizedstart-upsoutof unemployment with regular start-ups (non-subsidized out of non- unemployment) in various dimensions of success including two objec- tivemeasuresforinnovativebehaviour.Theycreatedauniquedataset comprising representative samples of male participants in a German start-up subsidy and male regular founders that allows for a compre- hensive and in-depth comparison. The empirical findings support the theoretical arguments above, i.e., subsidized businesses lag behind in business growth and innovation 19 months after business formation. However, the results have to be interpreted with caution as they are likely still influenced by the subsidy itself, which expired only a few months before the survey. Therefore, the question remains as to whe- ther the initial differences in business outcomes compared to regular founders persist (or even grow), or whether subsidized businesses can catch up in the medium- and long-run. On the one hand, it can be ar- gued that the initial disadvantages for subsidized business founders resultinlowerinitialinnovationandgrowthintentionsandappropriate business strategies, which negatively affect long-term business out- comes, leading to persisting or widening gaps. On the other hand, it mightbethecasethat survivingsubsidizedbusinessescatchuponcethe subsidyhasfullyexpiredandallbusinesseswereequallyexposedtofullmarket mechanisms. 3. Institutional details and data 3.1. Institutionaldetails The subsidized founders in our sample received the “Gründungszuschuss” (start-up subsidy, SUS), which was initially in- troduced in August 2006 in Germany. 8In order to be eligible for thesubsidy,unemployedindividualshadtohaveaminimumentitlementto unemploymentbenefitI9ofatleast90daysatthetimeofprogramentry. Moreover, individuals applying for the SUS had to provide a --- institutional settings of start-up subsidy programs for unemployed job seekers (see Caliendo, 2016). We therefore contribute to the ongoing critical debate about the benefits and concerns related to this type ofpublic policy (Acs et al., 2016; Colombelli et al., 2016; Lerner, 2010; Shane, 2009). The analysis is based on an extension of the dataset used in Caliendoetal.(2015b) containingrepresentativesamplesofbusinesses emerging from a German start-up subsidy program targeted at un-employed individuals and regular businesses that were started out of non-unemploymentanddidnotreceivethesubsidy.Afollow-upsurvey allowsusacomparisonupuntil40monthsafterbusinessformationand permits an in-depth assessment of the development, growth and in- novation potential of subsidized start-ups (in comparison to regular start-ups). Insum,wefindthatthesubsidyattractsindividualswhofacemore severerestrictionswithrespecttotheavailabilityoforaccesstohuman, social, and financial capital. These individuals also display lower am- bitions,intentions,strategies,orcapabilitiesforgrowthandinnovation. Consequently, while survival rates are relatively high, initially sub- sidizedfounderspersistentlyperformworsethanregularfoundersfrom abusinessperspective,especiallyintermsofjobcreationandinnovation activity. For instance, only 2.2% (9.1%) of formerly subsidized busi- nesses filed a patent application (applied for protection of their corporate ID) within a time period of 40 months after start-up, com- pared to 5.9% (15.5%) among the regular business founders. Considering a more subjective assessment of innovation, 37.6% of formerly subsidized business owners and 44.3% of regular businesses report development of new ideas. The gaps are relatively constant or even widening over time. Hence, we do not see any indication of catching up in the longer run. Within the sample of founders who are stillactivelyoperatingtheirbusinessesinwave2,marketselectiondid not lead to a substantial convergence of (observable)
Moreover, individuals applying for the SUS had to provide a businessand financing plan to the Employment Agency that also had to be evaluated by a competent external institution. If all requirements were fulfilled, SUS was paid for a maximum duration of 15 months, with the subsidy comprising of two parts: During the first nine months after business start-up, an amount equivalent to the individual’s last unemployment benefit and a lump sum of € 300 to cover social security costs was paid monthly. 10After nine months, individuals could apply for an optional second period toreceive the lump sum of € 300 for another six months. While the first period of SUS could be legally claimed by all individuals who fulfilled alllegalrequirements,thefoundershadtoapplyforthesecondperiod by showing that their businesses are sufficiently economically active and having a sustainable plan for the following months. Therefore, foundershadtosubmitformalproofssuchasbusinessreportsincluding financial statements for the first six months, a detailed description of business activities and customer structure, and a preview on future profitability. The final assessment and decision was taken by the case- worker based on the submitted documents as well as contrasting the actualbusinessdevelopmentwithinthefirstsixmonthswiththeinitial business and financing plan (as submitted with the initial application forthesubsidy). 11Finally,itshouldbementionedthatsubsidizedstart- ups out of unemployment constituted a large share of about 40% to60% of all full-time start-ups in Germany between 2006 and 2011 (dependingontheunderlyingdatasource,see Caliendoetal.,2015b). 12 3.2. Datacreationandestimationsample Thedatasetweuseisalongitudinalextensionofatelephonesurvey whichwasinitiallycollectedby Caliendoetal.(2015b).Theycreateda unique data set that allows a comprehensive and in-depth comparison betweensubsidizedstart-upsoutofunemploymentandnon-subsidized start-ups out of non-unemployment. Based on different data --- averaging € 1093 and a lump sum of € 300 paid for nine months and an optional six month lump sum payment extension of which 61.7%benefited, yieldingaverage totalcosts of€13,650 (calculationis basedonresultsin Caliendoetal.,2016).Takingintoaccountthatthesubsidyreceipt was offset against the remaining unemployment benefit entitlement of onaverage 8 months, the “net” costs thus drop to € 4900.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 13
intergenerational transmissions, as well as their labor market status and,conditionalontheongoingbusinessactivityoftheirinitialstart-up from the first quarter in 2009, their business performance across var- ious dimensions. Restricting the analysis to male founders, 1478 (930) valid interviews could be completed with subsidized (regular) founders,see Fig.1.Basedonthissample, Caliendoetal.(2015b) show that subsidized founders significantly lag behind regular founders in termsofincome,businessgrowth,andinnovation.Wenowhaveaccess toasecondinterviewwavewiththesameindividualsthatextendsthe observation window to 40 months after start-up (wave 2). This allows ustoanalyzethepersistenceofinitialdifferencesinbusinessoutcomes betweenthe subsidizedandnon-subsidizedmale foundersup until3.5 years after business formation. Fig. 1shows that we have 827 (453) panel observations on subsidized (regular) founders available in wave 2. 3.3. Examinationofselectivepanelattrition As in many other surveys, we find a positive panel selection (see Table B.1 in the Supplementary Appendix for details): Respondents participating in both interview waves (panel sample) are on average older, have a higher educational and professional background, had higher earnings in the past, and experienced less lifetime unemploy- ment compared to the full sample in wave 1. More importantly, the panel attrition also induces a weak selective bias in our outcome vari- ables. Table B.2 in the Supplementary Appendix shows a raw compar- isonoftheoutcomevariablesbetweenthefullandthepanelsamplefor eachsubgroupoffounders.Itcanbeseenthatwave2respondentsare onaveragemorelikelytobeself-employedandreporthigherearnings in wave 1 than the full sample. Although only the difference in unemployment shares for regular founders is statistically significant, we nevertheless decided to pre- cautionally use a weighting procedure in order to correct for selective panel attrition for two reasons: First, the low numbers of observations
to correct for selective panel attrition for two reasons: First, the low numbers of observations might reduce the power of these significance tests and lead us – in- correctly – not to reject the absence of significantly selective panel at- trition.Andsecond,while theestimatedgapsintheempiricalanalysis arenotsensitivetotheweightingprocedure,itnonethelessremovesthe small positive biases in the absolute levels of business outcomes and ensurestheirrepresentativenessfortheunderlyingpopulations.Asthe chosen correction procedure, we implement inverse probability weighting(see Wooldridge,2002).13Theweightingprocedureremoves almost all statistically significant differences in observable character-istics (see Table B.1) and reduces the differences in means for the outcomevariablesevenfurther(seeTableB.2).Therefore,theempirical analysis will rely on the weighted outcome variables.4. Empirical results Inordertoanalyzewhetherformerlysubsidizedbusinessesstilllag behind regular businesses, we compare their performances up to 40monthsafterstart-up,i.e.,morethantwoyearsafterthesubsidyhas expired.Inthefollowingempiricalanalysis,westartwithadescriptive comparison of business survival between formerly subsidized and reg- ular founders (Section 4.1). After that, we restrict our analysis to founders who are still self-employed and actively operating the same business thatwascreatedinthefirst quarterof2009andcomparethe businessperformancebetweenthetwogroupsovertime(Section4.2). 4.1. Comparisonofbusinesssurvivalandlabormarketstatus We measure business survival at the time of the interview by creating a dummy variable which is equal to one if the individual’s main employment activity is self-employment with the same business started in the first quarter of 2009, and zero otherwise. 14Table 1also reportstheshareofinitialfounderswhoreporttheirmainactivitytobedependent employment or unemployment at the time of interview. It can be seen that the survival rate significantly decreases for for-
at the time of interview. It can be seen that the survival rate significantly decreases for for- merly subsidized founders from 79.7% in wave 1 to 71.1% in wave 2, whiletheshareforregularfoundersincreasesovertimefrom71.7%to 77.9%. 15Thesedivergingdevelopmentsresultinasignificantnegative gap of 6.8%-points for subsidized founders compared to regular foun-ders 40 months after start-up. Ontheonehand,thedeclineinself-employmentshareforformerly subsidized founders might indicate that the subsidy artificially in- creased the survival rate of subsidized founders in wave 1, while in wave2marketcompetitionsortedoutlessprofitablebusinessesinline with the survival-of-the-fittest mechanism (Fritsch and Schroeter,2011).Ontheotherhand,theshareofnecessitystart-upsis generally more pronounced among formerly unemployed founders (Caliendoetal.,2015b;2020),whichmightresultinasubstantialshare offormerlysubsidizedfounderspreferringdependentemploymentover self-employment in the medium and long run. Taking a closer look at the shares of founders in dependent employment and unemployment revealsthatinwave2closeto20%offormerlysubsidizedfoundersare Fig.1.Datagenerationandsamplerestrictions. Note:Fordetailsontheconstructionofthedataset,see Section3inthetextand Caliendoetal.(2015b,Section4). 13A detailed description of the weighting procedure is included in the Supplementary Appendix.14Werestrictthesampletofoundersoperatingthesamebusinessasatstart- up because we are interested in the survival and business development of the initially subsidized businesses. Furthermore, detailed business outcomes areonly observed for the original start-up cohort of businesses created in the first quarter of 2009. Restricting it to self-employment as main activity excludes businesses which are run only as secondary or part-time activities, e.g., in ad-dition to another full-time job or attending university. 15Colombelli et al. (2016) report survival rates of business start-ups below 50% within the first five
et al. (2016) report survival rates of business start-ups below 50% within the first five years. Bartelsmann et al. (2005) find for OECD countries that 20–40% fail within the first two years. Therefore, the survivalratesinoursamplearesignificantlyhigher,whichcanbeexplained(inpart)by the construction of our sample, i.e., we consider only start-ups in full-time by male founders.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 5
Fig. 2.Business development over time. Note:Reported are shares and averages for subsidized business founders (out of unemployment) and regular business founders(i.e.,non-subsidizedoutofnon-unemployment)whoareself-employedattherespectivepointintimewiththesamebusinessasatstart-up.Wave1(wave2) values are measured 19 (40) months after start-up. Outcomes are weighted for panel attrition. ***/**/* indicates significant difference at the 1/5/10% level. aIncome measures are inflation-adjusted to 2010 levels (Federal Statistical Office, 2014). We excluded outliers who reported a monthly income from self-em- ployment larger than€ 25,000. bNumberoffull-timeequivalentemployees(FTE)isaweightedsum,wherefull-timeemployeesareassignedaweightof1,part-timeemployeesandapprenticesare weighted by 0.5, and others by 0.25. We excluded some outliers from the analysis who reported implausibly high values. cConstrained access to capital indicates that founders wanted to borrow but did not receive a loan.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 6 --- are shares for subsidized business founders (out of unemployment) and regular business founders (i.e., non-subsidized out of non-unemployment). Positive (negative) intergroup differences indicate a higher (lower) value amongsubsidized founders. Wave 1 (wave 2) values are measured 19 (40) months after start-up.Missingcategoriesnotreportedherearemarginalemployment,highereducation/vocationaltraining,andothermainactivity.Outcomesareweightedforpanel attrition. ***/**/* indicates significant difference at the 1/5/10% level. aSelf-employed with same business as at start-up. bUnemployed or participation in active labor market program (ALMP). 16As a limitation, we neither observe the total amount of the loan nor whe- ther individuals who did not receive a loan but wanted to borrow actually applied for a loan. 17To set these figures in perspective, the German Federal Statistical Office (2012, p.106)reportsaveragemonthlygrossearningsof€2976foramalefull- timeworkerindependentemploymentinGermanyinthethirdquarterof2012 (when income measures 40 months after start-up were surveyed). Applying a net-to-grossratioof70%,assumingathree-personhousehold(marriedcouple,one child) with one breadwinner and residence in West Germany (Federal Statistical Office, 2013, p. 10) and adjusting for inflation to 2010 le- vels, this translates into net monthly earnings of € 2,001.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 7
dependentlyemployed,whiletheunemploymentshareisrelativelylow at 3.3%. In contrast, the slight increase in the survival rate of regular foun- ders can be explained by individuals who temporarily ran their busi- nesses only part-time in wave 1 (predominately due to parallel higher education)andreturntotheirbusinessesasthemainactivityinwave2. In fact, this is true for 11.2% of regular founders. Since 5% of self- employed regular founders from wave 1 quit their businesses as the main activity by wave 2, this results in a net increase in business sur- vival of 6.2%-points, as reported in Table 1. The share of dependently employed (unemployed), at 13.2% (1.2%), is significantly lower than for subsidized founders. Taken together, while labor market integration is comparable be- tween thetwogroups, thedescriptive shares indicatea lower business survival among formerly subsidized business founders compared to regular founders 40 months after start-up. 4.2. Comparisonofbusinessperformanceandinnovationactivities To assess the business performance, we restrict our sample to founders who are still self-employed and actively operating the same businessasatstart-upinthefirstquarterof2009ateachinterview.We consider four different sets of variables: (i) income, (ii) job creation, (iii) degree of innovation as outcome variables, and (iv) access to ca- pital as an intermediate business indicator. Income is measured as monthly and as hourly net earned income from self-employment (in euros,inflation-adjustedto2010levelsfollowingthe FederalStatistical Office, 2014). With respect to job creation, we consider both the ex-tensive andintensive margin, i.e., theshare of businesses with at least oneemployeeaswellasthenumberoffull-timeequivalentemployees, bothunconditionallyandconditionalonhavingatleastoneemployee. Thenumberoffull-timeequivalentemployeesisaweightedsumwhere full-time employees are assigned a weight of 1, part-time employees and apprentices are weighted by 0.5, and others by
are assigned a weight of 1, part-time employees and apprentices are weighted by 0.5, and others by 0.25. Within the entrepreneurship literature, the degree of innovation is usually mea- sured by patents (Coad and Rao, 2008; Griliches, 1990) or subjective perceptions of entrepreneurs on innovational activities (Cefis and Marsili, 2006; Colombelli et al., 2016; Pellegrino et al., 2012). While patents can be considered to be more objective, they are at the same alsomorenarrowbecausenotallinnovationsarepatented(Halletal., 2001; Moser, 2016), leading potentially to an underestimation of the truedegreeofinnovation.Incontrast,subjectiveperceptionsaremuch broader,butalsofacetherisktosuffermeasurementerror.Inourstudy, we have indicators for both objective and subjective measures avail- able.Asobjectiveindicators,weobservetheshareoffounderswhofiled at least one patent application or an application to protect corporate identitysincestart-up.Thesubjectivemeasureisbasedonthequestion whetherbusinessesgeneratenewideas,questioningexistingprocesses.Finally,accesstocapitalisreflectedbytheshareoffounderswhohave receivedaloansincestart-upandtheshareoffounderswhoseaccessto capital was constrained in that they wanted to borrow but did not re- ceive a loan. 16 4.2.1. Businessperformance Focussing on business performance indicators, Fig. 2shows the re- sults of a comparison of formerly subsidized and regular businesseswith respect to income, job creation and access to capital measured at wave 1 (19 months after start-up) and wave 2 (40 months after start- up). The dark bars represent the average outcome of formerly sub- sidized founders, while the light bars depict the gaps to regular foun- ders for a given point in time. The dashed lines connecting the bars between waves illustrate the intragroup development over time. Sig- nificant gaps between groups and significant changes over time are indicated by stars attached to the reported differences. IncomeThe development of the earnings
are indicated by stars attached to the reported differences. IncomeThe development of the earnings profiles of subsidized foundersin Fig.2aandbshowsasignificantincreaseovertimeinboth monthly net income (from € 2,400 to € 2,800) 17and hourly net earn- ings (from € 11.7 to € 14.4), which might be explained by market se- lectionaswellasincreasedproductivityorprofitability.Incomparison, monthly earned net income for regular founders stagnates over time, yetonasignificantlyhigherlevelaround€3,100.Insum,thisresultsin a reduced monthly income gap between both groups (from € 700 to about€230).However,whilemonthlyincomesareconverging,thegap in hourly earnings grew from € 4.10 in wave 1 to € 6.60 in wave 2, indicating an increasing disparity with respect to productivity or prof- itability between the two groups. Jobcreation Fig.2c–ereportsignificantlyincreasingnumbersforjob creationamongformerlysubsidizedandregularbusinessesonboththe extensive as well as intensive margin over time. While the majority of formerly subsidized businesses still operate as solopreneurs in wave 2, 45% of this group employ on average 3.3 full-time equivalent em- ployees (FTE), a significant increase on both margins compared to wave 1 by 10%-points and 0.4 FTE, respectively. Overall, this re- presentsasignificantincreaseintheaveragenumberofFTEfrom1.0in wave 1 to 1.4 per operating business by the end of our observationTable 1 Main labor market status. Subsidized founders Regular founders Comp.: Sub.v. reg. Wave 1 Wave 2 Change Wave 1 Wave 2 Change Wave 1 Wave 2 (1) (2) (1) v. (2) (3) (4) (3) v. (4) (1) v. (3) (2) v. (4) Self-employed with same businessa0.797 0.711 −0.086*** 0.717 0.779 0.062*** 0.079*** −0.068*** Dep. employed 0.122 0.196 0.073*** 0.104 0.132 0.027** 0.018 0.064*** Unemployedb0.051 0.033 −0.018* 0.012 0.012 −0.000 0.038*** 0.021*** Number of obs. 827 827 453 453 1280 1280 Note:Reported are shares for subsidized business founders (out of unemployment) and regular business founders
window. Combining these job creation numbers with the self-employ- ment shares in each wave (see Table 1again) yields the direct em- ploymenteffectspersubsidygranted,irrespective ofbusinesssurvival.Ontopofhelpingthefoundertostartabusinessandthusprovidinghim with an employment opportunity, each subsidy in the initial start-up cohort results on average in an additional0.8 FTE (0.797 × 1.0 FTE) after 19months andin additional1.0FTE(0.711 × 1.4FTE)after40 months. This indicates a substantial “double dividend” of the subsidy. In contrast, only one third of regular business founders are solo- preneursinwave2andtheremainingbusinessesemploysevenFTEon average. In total, the group differences between formerly subsidized andregularbusinesses onalljobcreationindicatorsinbothwavesare statistically significant. While there is some minor catching up on the extensive margin by wave 2, the employer rate is still 50% (or 22%- pointsinabsoluteterms)higheramongregularfounders.Furthermore, the gaps on the intensive margin are highly persistent and even widening over time. Among all employer businesses, the average number of FTE for regular founders is 7.2, more than twice as high compared to 3.3 for formerly subsidized businesses. 18Compared to subsidized founders, the additional direct employment effects among regularbusinessesarehigherandonaverageamountto2.7FTE(0.717 × 3.7FTE) after 19months and 3.7FTE (0.779 × 4.8FTE) after 40 months per newly founded business of the initial start-up cohort. Capitalconstraints Asanadditionalintermediatebusinessindicator, we investigate access to capital as a critical factor for business devel- opmentandgrowth(Aghionetal.,2007;Pissarides,1999;Wiklundand Shepherd,2003). Fig.2fshowsthatthe(cumulative)shareofformerly subsidized founders who have successfully received a loan since start-up increased from 21% in wave 1 to 29% in wave 2. The shares are 15%-pointslowercomparedtoregularfoundersinbothwaves.Itisnot directly clear, however, whether these gaps in
directly clear, however, whether these gaps in take-up rates reflect differential access to capital or merely differences in the demand for capital.Thisiswhy Fig.2greportstheshareoffounderswhoseaccessto creditwasconstrainedinthesensethattheywantedtoborrowbutdid notreceivealoan.Creditconstraintsaffect13%offormerlysubsidized founders in wave 1 and 16% in wave 2. For regular founders, the numbers decrease over time from 12% to 11%, which represents a significantgapof5%-pointscomparedtoformerlysubsidizedfounders at the end of our observation window. This evidence is in line with unemployed founders facing more severe barriers to access loans (see, e.g.,Perry,2006).Takingbothsharesfrom Figs.2fand 2gtogetherasa crude measure for total loan demand (satisfied and unsatisfied), we nevertheless find higher prevalence among regular founders by about 14%-pointsinwave1and10%-pointsinwave2.Thisresultmightalso reflect less capital intensive business opportunities and lower growth oriented ambitions and strategies of formerly subsidized businesses. 4.2.2. Innovationactivities Fig.3showstheresultswithrespecttoinnovationactivities.While information on patenting and protection of corporate identity is mea- suredinwave1(19monthsafterstart-up)andwave2(40monthsafter start-up), the subjective measure (development of new ideas) is only available in wave 2. Figures 3a and 3b show that both types of business founders are increasinglyinvolvedininnovationovertime.Theapplicationratesfor patentsas acommonmeasurefor innovativeactivity reaches2.2%for formerly subsidized businesses, but is more than twice as high for regular businesses (5.9%) in wave 2. 19As an alternative objectiveinnovation indicator, we also analyze the shares of businesses that apply forprotection oftheircorporateID.We findasimilarpatternas forpatents,i.e.,theratesareincreasingovertimebutonahigherlevel. The rates are 9.1% for formerly subsidized businesses and 15.5% for regular ones. Regarding the subjective indicator, Fig. 3c
subsidized businesses and 15.5% for regular ones. Regarding the subjective indicator, Fig. 3c shows that 37.6% ofsubsidized businesses reporting development of new ideasin wave 2, which is 6.7%-points less than for the group of regular busi- nesses. As expected and discussed above, measuring innovation based on patents (Fig. 3a) leads to a much lower number compared to the subjectivemeasure(Fig.3c).Thisisinlinewithotherstudiesreporting 30–40% using subjective perceptions to measure innovation (see Colombellietal.,2016;Pellegrinoetal.,2012).However,independent of the absolute degree of innovation, the key finding here is that for- merly subsidized founders persistently lag behind in innovative activ- ities.Thisisinlinewiththetheoreticalexpectationsin Section2.Dueto negative externalities induced by the subsidy and disadvantagedstarting conditions (in particular with respect to knowledge context), subsidizedbusinessesoutofunemploymentareexpectedtoinduceless innovation than non-subsidized business start-ups out of non-un- employment. All in all, we can conclude that formerly subsidized businesses in- deedgrowandbecomemoreinnovativeovertime.Comparedtoregular businesses,however,theystillsignificantlylagbehind40monthsafter start-up, with decreasing differences in monthly incomes but persis- tentlyremainingorevengrowinggapswithrespecttoproductivity,job creation, investments and innovation. 5. What explains the differences? We now want to explore possible explanations for this finding. As discussed in the introduction, the groups of subsidized and regular founders differ in their individual and business-related start-up char- acteristics for several reasons. Besides the fact that the subsidy might induce an adverse selection, starting a business out of unemployment by itself might also lead to more severe disadvantages and restrictions compared to regular founders (see Section 2). This suggests that un- employed individuals who enter entrepreneurship might have lowerhuman
2). This suggests that un- employed individuals who enter entrepreneurship might have lowerhuman capital and entrepreneurial abilities and set up smaller busi- nesses with less growth potential due to more restrictive access to re- sources like social networks or capital, less time to explore business opportunities and strategies, or lower growth ambitions. Caliendo et al. (2015b) indeed find evidence indicating initial differ- ences in observable characteristics at the time of business formation, showing that subsidized founders suffer from a shortage of employ- ment-andindustry-specificexperience,moreseverecapitalconstraints, and fewer spillovers from intergenerational transmissions than regular founders. Using the panel data, in a first step, we now look at whether these differences remain for the surviving businesses over time or whether the two groups converged once the subsidyhas fully expired andboth groupswereequallyexposedtofullmarketmechanisms.Althoughone couldassumethatthesurvivingbusinessesinwave2 aremore similar intheircharacteristicsthanthetwofullinitialstart-upcohorts,wewill seeinSection5.1 thatthisisnotthecase,andsignificantdifferencesin observable characteristics remain. Hence, in a subsequent step, we analyzeinSection5.2 towhatextentthesedifferencescanexplainthe 18BasedontheGermanMicrocensus,anannualrepresentative1%surveyof the German population, Petermann and Piorkowsky (2013, pp. 15, 177) find that in 2009 (parallel to the business start-ups in our sample), 72.2% of male business founders in main activity started as solopreneurs, while in 2012 (parallel to wave 2) 52.4% of all men with self-employment as their main ac- tivity have at least one employee.19Forcomparison, Niefert(2005),usingdatafromtheZEWFoundationPanel (Almusetal.,2000),findsthat3.2%ofasampleofGermanstart-upsfoundedinthe early 1990s applied for at least one patent by 1999/2000. However, these numbers are not conditional on survival and therefore underestimate patent
However, these numbers are not conditional on survival and therefore underestimate patent applicationsforsurvivors. EngelandKeilbach(2007) report,basedonasample of21,517Germanbusinessesfoundedbetween1995–1998originatingfromthe same data source, that at the time of business formation, 2.2% of all start-ups applied for at least one patent.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 8
gap in business survival and business development. 5.1. Comparisonofobservablestart-upcharacteristics Table 2shows a comparison of some selected observable char- acteristics at business formation for the start-up cohort in the first quarterof2009(columns1and2)andforallself-employedindividuals with the same business as at start-up in wave 2 (columns 3 and 4).20 While subsidized founders at start-up do not lag behind in formaleducation, they show less intergenerational transmissions in terms of parental self-employment and business takeover from their parents, haveloweremploymentexperiences,operateunderlessfavorablelocal market conditions and have less industry-specific experience and ca- pital. In contrast to the general expectations that subsidized founders out of unemployment are primarily driven by necessity and regular foundersbyopportunitymotives,wefindthattheopportunitymotive– the desire to be one’s own boss – is the dominating motive in both groups (38% and 41% for subsidized and regular founders respec- tively).However,wealsoseethathighersharesofsubsidizedfounders (23%)reportaclassicalnecessitymotive–theunavailabilityofregular employment – compared to regular founders (10%). As reported in columns 3 and 4, initial differences, to a large degree, have not van- ished once we restrict the comparison to formerly subsidized and reg- ular founders who remain active with the same business up until wave2.Itcanbeseenthatthedistributionofobservablecharacteristics changes slightly for both groups, reflecting the selection of surviving businesses over time. There is no clear pattern of the selection me- chanism,though.Whilethetwogroupsbecomemoresimilar,e.g.,with respect to nationality, university education, or sector choice, the dif- ferences between the groups get even more pronounced over time in other characteristics like parental self-employment, unemployment or industry-specific experience. Overall, the differences between --- diff. founders founders diff. start-up characteristics (1) (2) (1) v. (2) (3) (4) (3) v. (4) A.Personalcharacteristics Age (in years) 42.0 45.2 −3.2*** 41.8 45.3 −3.5*** Not German 0.076 0.044 0.032*** 0.060 0.051 0.009 B.Humancapital Upper secondary school 0.474 0.475 −0.001 0.479 0.494 −0.016 Technical college education (master craftsman) 0.173 0.252 −0.079*** 0.190 0.280 −0.090*** University education 0.309 0.282 0.027 0.310 0.298 0.011 C.Intergenerationaltransmission Parents are/were self-employed 0.328 0.462 −0.134*** 0.332 0.501 −0.169*** Business takeover from parents 0.034 0.170 −0.135*** 0.047 0.214 −0.167*** Upper secondary schoolingof father 0.253 0.249 0.004 0.236 0.239 −0.003 D.Labormarkethistory Monthly net income from last dep. employment right before start-up €0−€1000 0.094 0.050 0.045*** 0.090 0.042 0.048*** >€2500 0.206 0.164 0.042*** 0.214 0.178 0.036* No unemployment experience before start-up 0.051 0.542 −0.491*** 0.062 0.581 −0.519*** E.Regionalinformation Local macroeconomic conditions Vacancies related to stock of unemployed 14.9 15.6 −0.7** 15.0 15.6 −0.6* Unemployment rate 8.6 7.5 1.0*** 8.6 7.6 1.0*** F.Start-upmotivesc Desire to be one’s own boss 0.376 0.412 −0.036* 0.389 0.461 −0.072*** Unavailability of regular job 0.227 0.101 0.126*** 0.190 0.091 0.099*** G.Business-relatedcharacteristics Sectoral distribution of businesses Manufacturing, crafts 0.140 0.223 −0.083*** 0.170 0.240 −0.070*** Other services 0.245 0.193 0.052*** 0.220 0.186 0.034* Industry-spec. experience before start- up due to former self-employment 0.202 0.265 −0.063*** 0.192 0.278 −0.085*** Capital invested at start-up None 0.193 0.178 0.016 0.162 0.150 0.012 ≥€50,000 0.080 0.181 −0.101*** 0.101 0.204 −0.104*** Number of obs. 827 453 1280 614 360 974 Note:All reported numbers are shares (unless stated otherwise) for subsidized business founders (out of unemployment) and regular business founders (i.e., non- subsidized out of non-unemployment) and refer to start-up.
self-employment, unemployment or industry-specific experience. Overall, the differences between thegroupsremainsignificantandsubstantial,inparticularwithrespectto intergenerational transmissions, lifetime unemployment, start-up mo- tives, industry-specific experience, and start-up capital. 5.2. Decompositionanalysis Giventhatthesedifferencesstill exist40months after start-up,the questionarisesastowhatextentthestructuraldifferencesinobservable characteristics at start-upexplain the gap in business development. To shedlightonthisquestion,weconductaBlinder-Oaxacadecomposition analysis(Blinder,1973;Oaxaca,1973)anddecomposetherawgapsin businessperformanceΔ Rawintoanexplainedpartduetodifferencesin initial characteristics and an unexplained part:21 = = = +Y Y F X F X F X F X F X F X( ) ( ) { ( ) ( )} { ( ) ( )}RawSub Reg sub i sub reg i reg sub i sub sub i reg Explainedsub i reg reg i reg Unexplained, , , , , , (1) More specifically, we arrange the full list of 70 observable character- istics at business formation into seven blocks of related variables on personal characteristics, human capital, intergenerational transmis- sions, labor market history, regional information, start-up motives, as well as business characteristics (further divided into business sector, industry-specificexperience,andstartcapitalformoredetailedinsight) and control for the blocks individually and jointly (X i). Our two main outcome variables of interest are business survival and whether thebusiness has created any employment. 22Since both outcomes are Fig. 3.Innovationactivitiesovertime. Note:Reportedaresharesforsubsidizedbusinessfounders(outofunemployment)andregularbusinessfounders(i.e.,non- subsidized out of non-unemployment) who are self-employed at the respective point in time with the same business as at start-up. Wave 1 (wave 2) values are measured 19 (40) months after start-up. Outcomes are weighted for panel attrition. ***/**/* indicates significant difference at the 1/5/10% level. --- Supplementary Appendix), start-up characteristics explain almost 50% of the employment gaps in wave 1, with start-up capital (25%), inter- generational transmissions (22%), and start-up motives (11%) pro- viding the highest explanatory contributions. Thus, while start-up characteristics are strong determinants of short-term business perfor- mance, business growth in the longer run instead seems to be more affected by other factors. Businessstrategiesand dynamics To test alternative explanations for thegapsinemploymentgrowthinwave2,weextendthelistofcontrol variablesXiin the decomposition analysis by adding factors that cap- ture business strategies and dynamics. In a first step, we include two indicatorsonaccesstocapital.Asalreadyreportedin Section4.2,while formerly subsidized founders have lower demand for capital and facemoreseverecreditconstraintsthanregularfounders,accesstocapitalis a crucial factor forbusiness growth (Aghion et al., 2007; Wiklundand Shepherd, 2003). In a second step, we aim to consider unobserved factorsthatcanbesummarizedintotwogroups.Ontheonehand,there are unobserved variables at start-up that reflect the fundamental busi- ness strategy and access to innovation-specific knowledge, like the founder’s intention, opportunity and ability to innovate and grow at business formation (see Section 2for a discussion why we expect dif- ferences in this regard between subsidized and regular start-ups). On the other hand, there are business dynamics after start-up, where foundersimplementtheirinitialstrategiesandadapttheirdecisionsas a reaction to challenges and changes in their business environment. Sincethesevariablesareunobservedinourdata,weinsteadincludethe intermediate wave 1 outcome on employment as a proxy variable. It can be seen as the resultof all observable and unobservable factors in the early business phase up until wave 1 and thus should best in-corporate the unobserved initial business strategies as well as early business dynamics that we do
are weighted for panel attrition. ***/**/* indicates significant difference at the 1/5/10% level. aInnovation was surveyed only for a random 50% subsample. bThe variable is based on respondents’ judgement concerning the following statement: “My business aims to generate new ideas, questioning existing processes”. Respondentsansweredonascalefrom1-totallyagreeto7-totallydisagree.Wedefineadummyindicatortakingthevalueoneforvalues1to3,andzerootherwise. The question is not availablein wave 1. 20Thefulllist ofobservablecharacteristics atbusinessformationis reported in Table A.1 in the Supplementary Appendix.21Fordetailsontheimplementationofthedecompositionanalysis,seeTable A.2 in the Supplementary Appendix. 22Inaddition,wereporttheresultsofthedecompositionanalysisforthegaps in hourly income and number of full-time employees in Table A.3 in theSupplementary Appendix. The findings are very similar to those for the two main outcomes. Regarding innovation-related outcome variables, we cannot run the detailed decomposition analysis due to too small sample size. TheM.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 9 --- regular business founders (i.e., non- subsidized out of non-unemployment) and refer to start-up. Positive (negative) intergroup differences indicate a higher (lower) value among subsidized founders. Variables are weighted for panel attrition. ***/**/* indicate significantly different means between the two groups at the 1/5/10% level. aSelf-employed with same business in wave 2 as at start-up. bA full list of start-up characteristics is reported in Table A.1 in the Supplementary Appendix. cReported are shares of individuals with values of 6 and 7 on a 7-point Likert-type scale from 1 “does not apply at all” to 7 “applies completely”. (footnotecontinued)information on innovationis only availablefor 50%of the sample,and onlyasmall fraction reports such activities at all. 23Estimations are conducted in Stata using the nldecompose-package (Sinning et al.,2008). 24An explained share of more than 100% indicates that the inclusion of the controlvariableschangestheinitiallynegativeunconditionalgaptoapositiveconditional gap. A negative explained share means that the control variables (footnotecontinued)increasetheabsoluteamountoftheinitialgap.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 10
binary, we choose a probit approach, setting = F(·) (·), and use maximum likelihood for estimation.23Results are reported in Table 3. Start-up characteristics Panel A in Table 3shows that, un- conditionally,formerlysubsidizedfoundershaveanegativerawgapin business survival of 6.8%-points in wave 2 compared to regular foun- ders (as already reported in Table 1). Controlling for each of the cov- ariate blocks reported in Panel C individually (specifications 1 to 7)reveals that this gap is mainly explained by differences in inter- generational transmissions (accounting for 53% of the survival gap, spec.3)andlabormarkethistories(104%,spec.4). 24Start-upmotives(31%, spec. 6) and business sector choice (28%, spec. 7a) are also im- portant, but to a lesser extent. Once we condition on all start-up char- acteristicsavailable(spec.8),theunexplainedgapinbusinesssurvival virtuallyvanishes,becomespositivebutclosetozeroandinsignificant. Panel B repeats the exercises for the dummy variable indicating at least one employee in wave 2. This time, the control variables only explain a small fraction of the raw gap, with intergenerational trans- missions (14%, spec. 3), start-up motives (12%, spec. 6) and business- relatedcharacteristics(22%,spec.7)havingthehighestbut,inabsolute terms,verylowexplanatorypower.Thefulllistofvariablesreducesthe unexplained performancegap by only15%(spec. 8).This implies that the differences in job creation are driven by other factors that are not sufficiently captured by our list of available start-up characteristics. Asaninterestingsidenote,ifweconductadecompositionanalysis for the employment dummy in wave 1 (see Table A.4 in theTable 2 Comparison of selected start-up characteristics between subsidized and regular founders. Self-employed founders at start-up with same business in wave 2a Sub. Reg. Mean Sub. Reg. Mean Selected listbof founders founders diff. founders founders diff. start-up characteristics (1) (2) (1) v. (2) (3) (4) (3) v. (4) --- Table 3 Decomposition analysis of business performance gaps between formerly subsidized and regular founders. Specification Raw gap (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7a) (7b) (7c) (7) (8) A.Outcomevariable: Self-employed with same business in wave 2a Unexplained −0.068*** −0.087*** −0.065** −0.032 0.003 −0.066** −0.047 −0.049* −0.096*** −0.067** −0.073** 0.006 Explained 0.019 −0.003 −0.036*** −0.071** −0.002 −0.021** −0.019** 0.028*** 0.000 0.005 −0.075** % Explained −27.5 4.6 53.3 104.2 2.5 30.9 28.4 −41.1 −0.4 −8.0 109.2 Number of obs. 1280 1280 1280 1280 1280 1280 1280 1280 1280 1280 1280 1280 B.Outcomevariable: At least one employee in wave 2 Unexplained −0.220*** −0.253*** −0.208*** −0.188*** −0.256*** −0.204*** −0.192*** −0.207*** −0.216*** −0.179*** −0.171*** −0.188*** Explained 0.034⁎⁎−0.011 −0.031 0.036 −0.016 −0.027** −0.013 −0.004 −0.040** −0.049** −0.033 % Explained −15.6 5.1 14.2 −16.3 7.4 12.3 5.9 1.7 18.3 22.2 15.1 Number of obs. 974 974 974 974 974 974 974 974 974 974 974 974 C.Controlvariablesb: Start-up characteristics: (1)Personalcharact. √ √ (2)Humancapital √ √ (3)Intergen.transm. √ √ (4)Labormarkethist. √ √ (5)Regionalinfo. √ √ (6)Start-upmotives √ √ (7)Businesscharact. (a)Businesssector √ √ √ (b)Ind.-spec.exper. √ √ √ (c)Startcapital √ √ √ Total number of control variables 9 5 7 16 6 7 7 6 7 20 70 Note:ReportedareestimationresultsofaBlinder-Oaxacaprobitdecompositionforsubsidizedbusinessfounders(outofunemployment)asthebasegroupusingtheStatapackage nldecompose (Sinningetal.,2008).For details,seeTableA.2intheSupplementaryAppendix.Standarderrorsarebootstrappedusing499replications.Outcomesareweightedforpanelattrition.***/**/*indicatesstatisticalsignificanceatthe1/5/10%level. aSelf-employed with same business as at start-up. bA detailed list and summary descriptives of the underlying control variables are reported in Table A.1 in the Supplementary Appendix.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 11
the unobserved initial business strategies as well as early business dynamics that we do not capture in our previous analysis. Results are reported in Table 4. Torecapourbaselineresultsfromabove,therawemploymentgap in wave 2 amounts to 22%-points (first column of Table 4), and only 15%(or3%-points)ofthegapcanbeexplainedoncewecontrolforall available start-up characteristics (spec. 8), as already reported inTable 3. If we additionally include the two indicators on access to ca- pital (spec. 9), the explained part almost doubles to 28%, once again emphasizing the important role for business growth. Taken together withtheresultsabove,wethusfindthatwhilestart-upcapitalexplains asubstantialpartofshorttermgrowth,accesstocapitalisincreasingly important for business growth in the longer term. Controlling for the wave 1 outcome as a proxy for initial business strategiesandearlybusinessdynamicsalongwithallavailablestart-up characteristics (spec. 10) increases the explained share to more than 53%. The specification including all start-up characteristics, access to capital indicators as well as the wave 1 outcome (spec. 11) explains more than 60% of the employment gap in wave 2 between formerly subsidized founders and regular founders. In summary, the decomposition analysis shows that differences in business survival disappear entirely once we control for the (ob- servable) structural differences between the types of businesses and founder characteristics at start-up. Yet, only the short-run gap in job creation can be explained by initial endowment differences to a larger extent (49%). The long-run gap in business growth paths rather seems to be driven by unobserved factors like initial business strategies, dif- ferential access to capital, and post-start-up business dynamics. 6. Conclusion and policy implications Policies encouraging and supporting unemployed individuals to start a business have become common instruments of ALMP in many
statistical significance at the 1/5/10% level. aA detailed list and summary descriptives of the underlying control variables are reported in Table A.1 in the Supplementary Appendix. bAccesstocapitalincludestwodummyvariablesindicatingwhetherthefounderreceivedaloansincestart-upandwhetherthefounderwantedtoborrowbutdid not receive a loan. Summary descriptive statistics are reported in Fig. 2h and i. cSummary descriptive statistics are reported in Fig. 2c.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 12
not lead to a substantial convergence of (observable) start-up char- acteristicsbetweenthetwogroups.Whilethesedifferencescanentirelyexplain the gap in business survival, they do not represent the major empirical reason for the shortcomings in business growth and innova- tion. Exploring this point further, we find suggestive evidence that particularly a restricted access to capital as well as fundamentally dif- ferent business strategies and early business dynamics explain a large part of the persistent gap in business innovation and growth. Thesefindingsareinstarkcontrasttotherobustempiricalevidence from anALMP perspective showing that unemployed individuals are muchbetteroffparticipatingthannotparticipatinginstart-upsubsidyprograms (see Caliendo and Künn, 2011; Caliendo et al., 2016; Wolff etal., 2016,amongothers).Therefore, fromapolicystandpoint,start-up subsidies are seen as a highly effective tool to persistently re- integrate formerly unemployed individuals into the labor market and improvetheirincomesituations.Onaverage,theprogramcostsamount to € 4900per participant, 25whichis relatively lowcompared toother major ALMP programs (e.g., € 8200 for public employment schemes and € 4150 for wage subsidies in 2009), and in particular, given the additional job creation of 1.0 FTE per participant after 40 months (as calculated above). Considering these conflicting results for the assessment of the sub- sidy program, policy makers need to carefully weigh the costs and benefits of such an ALMP strategy to find the right policy mix. While theseprogramsarehighlyeffectiveinsustainablyimprovingindividual labormarketprospectsandstimulatesomeadditionaljobcreation,theyfall short of succeeding as an entrepreneurship policy in that they donotspurthecreationofhigh-growthorinnovativenewbusinesses,and themagnitudeofadditionaljobgrowthisratherlimited.Directchanges to the subsidy program are likely to cause trade-off effects between effectivenessasan activelabormarketpolicy
Small Bus. Econ.45(1), 165–190. Caliendo, M., Kritikos, A., 2010. Start-Ups by the unemployed: characteristics, survival and direct employment effects. Small Bus. Econ. 35 (1), 71–92. https://doi.org/10. 1007/s11187-009-9208-4. Caliendo, M., Kritikos, A., Stier, C., 2020. The Importance of Start-Up Motivation for Entrepreneurial Performance. Working Paper. University of Potsdam, Potsdam. Caliendo,M.,Künn,S.,2011.Start-upsubsidiesfortheunemployed:long-termevidence and effect heterogeneity. J. Public Econ. 95 (3–4), 311–331. Caliendo,M.,Künn,S.,Weißenberger,M.,2016.Personalitytraitsandtheevaluationof start-up subsidies. Eur. Econ. Rev. 86, 87–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. euroecorev.2015.11.008. Cefis,E.,Marsili,O.,2006.Survivor:theroleofinnovationinfirms’survival.Res.Policy 35, 626–641. Coad, A., Rao, R., 2008. Innovation and firm growth in high-tech sectors: aquantile re- gression approach. Res. Policy 37, 633–648. Colombelli, A., Krafft, J., Vivarelli, M., 2016. To be born is not enough: the key role of innovative start-ups. Small Bus. Econ. 47, 277–291. Congregado, E., Golpe, A.A., Carmona, M., 2010. Is it a good policy topromote self- employmentforjobcreation?EvidencefromSpain.J.PolicyModel.32(6),828–842. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpolmod.2010.09.001. Duhautois,R.,Redor,D.,Desiage,L.,2015.Longtermeffectofpublicsubisidiesonstart- up survivaland economic performance:an empirical study with French data. Rev. Écon. Ind. 149 (1), 11–41. Engel, D., Keilbach, M., 2007. Firm-level implications of early stage venture capital in- vestment-anempiricalinvestigation.J.Empir.Finance14(2),150–167. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.jempfin.2006.03.004. Evans, D., Jovanovic, B., 1989. An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under li- quidity constraints. J. Political Econ. 97, 808–827. FederalStatisticalOffice,2012.VerdiensteundArbeitskosten,Arbeitnehmerverdienste3. Vierteljahr 2012, Fachserie 16, Reihe 2.1. Wiesbaden. Federal Statistical Office, 2013. Verdienste und
2012, Fachserie 16, Reihe 2.1. Wiesbaden. Federal Statistical Office, 2013. Verdienste und Arbeitskosten, Nettoverdienste, Modellrechnung 2012, Fachserie 16, Reihe 2.5. Wiesbaden. Federal Statistical Office, 2014. Verbraucherpreisindizes für Deutschland. Wiesbaden. Fritsch, M., Schroeter, A., 2011. Why does the effect of new business formation differ across regions? Small Bus. Econ. 36 (4),383–400. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187- 009-9256-9. Griliches,Z.,1990.Patentstatisticsaseconomicindicators:asurvey.J.Econ.Lit.28(4), 1661–1707. Hall, B.H., Jaffe, A.B., Trajtenberg, M., 2001. The NBER patent citations andData File: Lessons, insights and methodological tools. Working Paper. NBER. Holtz-Eakin,D.,Joulfaian,D.,Rosen,H.S.,1994.Entrepreneurialdecisionsandliquidity constraints. RAND J. Econ.25, 334–347. Hombert,J.,Schoar,A.,Sraer,D.,Thesmar,D.,2014.CanUnemploymentInsuranceSpur Entrepreneurial Activity? Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), Cambridge, MAhttps://doi.org/10.3386/w20717. Hvide, H., Møen, J.,2007. Liquidity Constraints and Entrepreneurial Performance. Discussion Paper. Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR), London. Jovanovic, B., 1982. Selection and the evolution of industry. Econometrica 50 (3), 649–670. Lerner, J., 2010. The future of public efforts to boost entrepreneurship and venturecapital. Small Bus. Econ. 35, 255–264. Meager,N.,1996.Fromunemployementtoself-employement:labourmarketpoliciesfor business start-up. In: Schmidt, G., O’Reilly, J., Schömann, K. (Eds.), International Handbook of Labour Market Policy and Evaluation. Edward Elgar, pp. 489–519. Millán,J.M.,Congregado,E.,Román,C.,2012.Determinantsofself-employmentsurvival in Europe. Small Bus. Econ. 38 (2), 231–258. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-010- 9260-0. Millán, J.M., Congregado, E., Román, C., 2014. Entrepreneurship persistence with and without personnel: the role of human capital and previous unemployment. Int. Entrep. Manag. J. 10, 187–206. Millán, J.M., --- role of human capital and previous unemployment. Int. Entrep. Manag. J. 10, 187–206. Millán, J.M., Congregado, E., Román, C., 2014. Persistencein entrepreneurship and its implicationsfortheeuropeanentrepreneurialpromotionpolicy.J.PolicyModel.36, 83–106. Moser, P., 2016. Patents and innovation in economic history. Annu. Rev. Econ. 8, 241–258. Nanda,R.,2008.CostofExternalFinanceandSelectionintoEntrepreneurship.Working Paper. Harvard Business School, Boston, MA. Niefert,2005.PatentingBehaviourandEmploymentGrowthinGermanStart-upFirms:A Panel Data Analysis. Discussion Paper. Centre for European Economic Research(ZEW), Mannheim. Niefert, M., 2010. Characteristics anddeterminants of start-ups from unemployment: evidence from German micro data. J. Small Bus. Entrep. 23 (3), 409–429. Oaxaca,R.,1973.Male-femalewagedifferentialsinurbanlabormarkets.Int.Econ.Rev. 14 (3), 693–709. O’Leary,C.J.,1999.PromotingSelfEmploymentAmongtheUnemployedinHungaryand Poland. Working Paper. W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, MI. Paulson, A.L., Townsend, R.M., Karaivanov, A., 2006. Distinguishing limited liability from moral hazard in a model of entrepreneurship. J. Political Econ.114 (1), 100–144. Pellegrino, G., Piva, M., MarcoVivarelli, 2012. Young firms and innovation: a micro- econometric analysis.Struct. Change Econ. Dyn. 23, 329–340. Perry,G.,2006.AreBusinessStart-UpSubsidiesEffectivefortheUnemployed:Evaluation of Enterprise Allowance. Working Paper. Auckland University of Technology, Auckland. Petermann, S., Piorkowsky, M.-B., 2013. Selbstständige in Deutschland 2008–2012 mit einemExkursüberHaushalts-Unternehmens-Komplexe.DerSelbstständigen-Monitor mit dem vollständigen Datensatz des Mikrozensus des Statistischen Bundesamtes. Report. Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, Bonn. Pfeiffer, F., Reize, F., 2000. Business start-ups by the unemployed - an econometric analysis based on firm data. Labour Econ. 7 (5),629–663.
by the unemployed - an econometric analysis based on firm data. Labour Econ. 7 (5),629–663. Pissarides,F.,1999.Islackoffundsthemainobstacletogrowth?EBRD’sexperiencewith small-andmedium-sizedbusinessesinCentralandEasternEurope.J.Bus.Ventur.14 (5–6), 519–539. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0883-9026(98)00027-5. Rodriguez-Planas, N., Jacob, B., 2010. Evaluating active labor market programs in Romania. Empir. Econ. 38 (1), 65–84. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00181-009-0256-z. Román, C., Congregado, E., Millán, J.M., 2011. Dependent self-employment as a way to evade employment protection legislation. Small Bus. Econ. 37, 363–392. Román, C., Congregado, E., Millán, J.M., 2013. Start-up incentives: entrepreneurship policyoractivelabourmarketprogramme?J.Bus.Ventur.28(1),151–175. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.01.004. Rotger, G.P., Gørtz, M., Storey, D.J., 2012. Assessing the effectiveness of guided pre- paration for new venture creation and performance: theory and practice. J. Bus. Ventur. 27 (4), 506–521. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.01.003. Santarelli, E., Vivarelli, M., 2007. Entrepreneurship and the process of firms’ entry, sur- vival and growth. Ind. Corp. Change 16 (3),455–488. Schäfer, D., Talavera, O., Weir, C., 2011. Entrepreneurship, windfall gains andfinancial constraints: evidence from Germany. Econ.Model. 28 (5), 2174–2180. Shane, S., 2003. A General Theory of Entrepreneurship: The Individual-opportunity Nexus. New Horizons in Entrepreneurship Edward Elgar Publishing. Shane, S., 2009. Why encouraging more people to become entrepreneurs is bad public policy. Small Bus. Econ. 33 (2), 141–149. Sinning, M., Hahn, M., Bauer, T.K., 2008. The Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition for non- linear regression models. Stata J. 8 (4), 480–492. Storey, D., 2003. Entrepreneurship, small and medium sized enterprises andpublic po- licies. In: Acs,Z., Audretsch, D. (Eds.), Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research. Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 473–511. --- D. (Eds.), Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research. Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 473–511. Welter,F.,Baker,T.,Audretsch,D.,Gartner,W.,2017.Everydayenterpreneurship-acall for entrepreneurship research to embrace entrepreneurial diversity. Entrep. Theory Pract. 41 (3), 311–321. Wiklund,J.,Shepherd,D.,2003.Aspiringfor,andachievinggrowth:themoderatingrole of resources and opportunities. J. Manag. Stud. 40 (8), 1919–1941. Wolff,J.,Nivorozhkin,A.,Bernhard,S.,2016.Youcangoyourownway!thelong-term effectivenessofaself-employmentprogrammeforwelfarerecipientsinGermany.Int.J. Soc. Welf.25 (2),136–148. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijsw.12176. Wooldridge,J.M.,2002.EconometricAnalysisofCrossSectionandPanelData.TheMIT Press. Wren, C., Storey, D.J., 2002. Evaluating the effect of soft business support upon firm performance. Oxf. Econ. Pap. 54 (2), 334–365.M.Caliendo,etal. Resea rch Policy 49 (2020) 104053 14
En resumen, el texto analiza la efectividad de los subsidios para emprendedores desempleados en términos de supervivencia empresarial, crecimiento económico y acceso al capital. Se destaca que, si bien los subsidios pueden ayudar a integrar de manera sostenible a los desempleados en el autoempleo, también pueden tener efectos negativos como la selección adversa y el riesgo moral. Se sugiere que las diferencias en el rendimiento de las empresas subsidiadas y regulares pueden explicarse por restricciones de capital, diferencias en estrategias empresariales y dinámicas, y factores no observados. Se concluye que es importante considerar estos factores al diseñar políticas de apoyo al emprendimiento entre desempleados para maximizar su impacto.
