When Research Meets Development: Antecedents and Implications of Transfer Speed Jingshu Du, Bart Leten, Wim Vanhaverbeke, and Henry Lopez-Vega This paper focuses on the organization of new product development in large, R&D-intensive ﬁrms. In these ﬁrms, research and development activities are often separated. Research is conducted in dedicated research projects atspecialized research labs. Once research results are achieved by research projects, they are transferred to businessunits for further development and commercialization. We investigate the speed whereby research projects transfer theirﬁrst research results to business units (hereafter: transfer speed ). In particular, we analyze the antecedents and performance implications of transfer speed. Based on data of 503 research projects from a European R&D intensivemanufacturing ﬁrm, our results suggest that a fast transfer speed (as measured by the time it takes for a research projectto develop and transfer its ﬁrst research result to business units) is associated with a better research performance (asmeasured by the total number of transfers the research project generates). Moreover, we ﬁnd that different types ofexternal R&D partners—science-based and market-based partners—play distinct roles in speeding up project ﬁrstresearch transfers. While market-based partnerships (i.e., customers and suppliers) generally contribute to a fastertransfer of ﬁrst research results, science-based partnerships (i.e., universities and research institutions) only speed upﬁrst research transfers of technologically very complex projects. Our results also show that early patent ﬁlings byresearch projects accelerate ﬁrst research transfers. Introduction New product development (NPD) is at the heart of companies’ survival and renewal in today’scompetitive industrial landscape. In many industries, new products account for more than 50% ofﬁrms’ annual sales (Schilling and Hill, 1998) and NPD isperceived as a key management imperative
ofﬁrms’ annual sales (Schilling and Hill, 1998) and NPD isperceived as a key management imperative (Cooper andEdgett, 2009). However, new product development ischallenging and suffers from high failure rates(Castellion and Markham, 2013). The highest attritionrate occurs in the pre-development (research) phase(Cooper and Edgett, 2009) which features great risks anduncertainties. For instance, in the pharmaceutical indus-try, more than half of the research projects fail (Paulet al., 2010). Despite the high fall-off rate in the researchphase, research activities strongly determine futureproduct success (Markham, 2013) and greatly differenti-ate winners from losers on the market (de Brentani andReid, 2012). Therefore, carefully managing the researchphase is of paramount importance to improving theoverall success of NPD activities.In large R&D-intensive companies, research efforts are often separated from development activities (vonZedtwitz and Gassmann, 2002). By centralizing researchin research labs, ﬁrms can beneﬁt from economies ofscale, reduce transaction costs associated with internalcoordination, and generate more impactful research ﬁnd-ings (Argyres and Silverman, 2004). Product develop-ment, on the other hand, is usually conducted by businessunits, creating new product offerings to satisfy speciﬁcmarket needs. Once a tangible research result is achievedin research labs, this result is transferred to businessunit(s) that are interested in its further development andcommercialization. As such, transfers symbolize success-ful research outcomes, and serve as the single mostimportant input for business units in their developmentand commercialization activities (Chesbrough, 2006).Only transferred research results have the chance to becommercialized and launched in the marketplace, whichmakes the transfer of research results from research todevelopment a crucial step for the overall success of newproduct development. Despite its importance, the transfer of research
for the overall success of newproduct development. Despite its importance, the transfer of research results from research projects to business units remains a topicwhich has not yet received scholarly attention in the NPDliterature. While there are many aspects that relate toresearch transfers, this paper focuses on the speed whereby research projects transfer their ﬁrst research Address correspondence to: Jingshu Du, Vlerick Business School, Vlamingenstraat 83, 3000, Leuven, Flemish Brabant, Belgium. E-mail:jingshu.du@vlerick.com. Tel: +32488586449.J PROD INNOV MANAG 2014;31(6):1181–1198 © 2014 Product Development & Management AssociationDOI: 10. 1111/jpim.12249
results to business units (hereafter: transfer speed ). In the existing literature, speed (or “cycle time”) is pointed out asone of the most critical factors in the overall success ofnew product development (e.g., Cankurtaran, Langerak,and Grifﬁn, 2013), but the speed of intra-ﬁrm transfersfrom research projects to development units has not yetbeen studied (Vanhaverbeke, Du, Leten, and Aalders,2014). 1Moreover, as increasingly more companies and the projects within open up and collaborate withexternal partners (Chesbrough, 2003; Du, Leten, andVanhaverbeke, 2014), there is also a burning need in theopen innovation literature to examine the speed implica-tions of open innovation strategies on the NPD process.This paper investigates the antecedents and implicationsoftransfer speed . More speciﬁcally, it examines the effect of having a fast (or slow) ﬁrst transfer on the performanceof research projects, as well as the impact of (early) patent ﬁlings and two types of open innovationpartnerships—market-based and science-based R&Dpartnerships—on transfer speed, taking into account themoderating effect of the technological complexity of theresearch project. To investigate the antecedents and performance impli- cations of transfer speed, we rely on a unique dataset of503 research projects from a large European R&D–intensive manufacturing ﬁrm. This ﬁrm has an annualR&D budget above one billion euros during the entireobservation period (2003–2010) and its activities span avariety of industries. Our ﬁndings show that researchprojects that generate fast ﬁrst transfers are associatedwith a better research performance. Fast transfers enableresearch projects to collect early feedback from businessunits and help them to secure further research funding bysending a positive signal to the project sponsors andincrease their conﬁdence about the research project.Moreover, we ﬁnd that while market-based partnershipsspeed up research transfers in general, science-basedpartnerships are only
market-based partnershipsspeed up research transfers in general, science-basedpartnerships are only linked to the acceleration ofresearch transfers of technologically (very) complex proj-ects. Finally, research projects that apply for patents earlyon in the research process are more likely to generate fastﬁrst transfers to business units. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: the next section provides the theoretical background. Thesubsequent section presents the hypotheses, which is fol-lowed by a description of the data and research methods.The paper concludes with a discussion of the theoreticaland empirical implications, as well as the limitations andavenues for further research. Theoretical Background A theory that underlies the mechanism of transfers andtransfer speed from research projects to business units istheintra-ﬁrm transaction theory (Rotemberg, 1991). In intra-ﬁrm transactions, intermediate goods are producedand transferred between agents of the same ﬁrm (Kotabe,1992). In the intra-ﬁrm transfer process, it is often difﬁ-cult for the “buyer” agent to assess upfront the quality ofthe intermediate goods (potentially) transferred from the“supplier” unit, particularly when the goods are still intheir early phase of development, which is characterizedby great technological and market uncertainty. An impor-tant indicator for the “buyer” to signal the quality of theintermediate goods is the time or speed by which the intermediate goods are delivered (Rotemberg, 1991). Generally, delivery time can be inﬂuenced by two factors:1Transfer speed is different from the concept “fuzzy front end cycle time” (e.g., in Eling, Langerak, and Grifﬁn, 2013), with the latter referringto the time it takes a project to complete the fuzzy front end activities suchas opportunity identiﬁcation, idea generation and screening, concept devel-opment, and project planning. BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES Dr. Jingshu Du is research fellow at Vlerick Business School and Hasselt
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES Dr. Jingshu Du is research fellow at Vlerick Business School and Hasselt University, both located in Belgium. She received her Ph.D in applied economics from Hasselt University. Her current research inter-ests focus on open and collaborative innovation, business model inno-vation, and IP strategies in multinational ﬁrms. Dr. Bart Leten is associate professor of innovation management at the Vlerick Business School (Belgium) and assistant professor of manage- rial economics, strategy and innovation at the KU Leuven (Belgium). Hereceived a Ph.D. in applied economics from the KU Leuven. Hisresearch focuses on open innovation and intellectual property strategiesof multinational ﬁrms. Dr. Wim Vanhaverbeke is professor at the University of Hasselt. He is also visiting professor at ESADE Business School and the National university of Singapore. He has published in several international jour-nals such as Organization Science ,Research Policy ,California Man- agement Review ,Journal of Management Studies ,Small Business Economics ,Journal of Business Venturing , and Technovation .H ew a s co-editor with Henry Chesbrough and Joel West of the books Open Innovation: Researching a New Paradigm (OUP, 2006) and New Fron- tiers in Open Innovation (OUP, 2014). His current research is focusing on open innovation in SMEs, innovation ecosystems, and the implemen-tation of open innovation practices. He was recognized by IAMOT asone of the top 50 authors of technology and innovation management forthe period 2008–2012. Dr. Henry Lopez-Vega is a post-doctoral researcher in the department of management and engineering (IEI–FEK) at Linköping University, Sweden. He has a MSc and a Ph.D. from ESADE Business School,Spain. His research contributes to the burgeoning discussions on theimplementation of open innovation at MNCs and role of foreign sub-sidiaries in BRICS economies.1182 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from
J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
First, the supplier’s choice of delivery. For instance, the supplier of intermediate goods may act cautiously andwait purposively until the goods are perfected beforetransferring them to the buyer agent. Second, the supplieris genuinely incompetent to deliver high-quality goods intime (Allen and Faulhaber, 1988; Rotemberg, 1991).When the delivery of intermediate goods takes a longtime, it is hard for an interested buyer to ascertain whichof the two aforementioned situations (e.g., prudence orincompetence) holds true (Rotemberg, 1991). Fearing thesecond possibility, the potential buyer may decide not toaccept the intermediate good when it takes a long time fora supplier to deliver that good (Rotemberg, 1991). Itfollows that a competent supplier needs to show its com-petence early on to potential buyers in order to rule out aperception of being incompetent in the eyes of the poten-tial buyer. In other words, if the supplier is sound andcapable of delivering high-quality goods, the time framein which he or she delivers these goods ( transfer speed ) can be of particular importance to the success of itstransfers. In large, R&D-intensive ﬁrms, pre-development (research) and development activities are often con-ducted in different organizational units (von Zedtwitzand Gassmann, 2002). Research projects are typicallyconducted in research laboratories to beneﬁt from econo-mies of scale and scope, as well as reduced transactioncosts (Argyres and Silverman, 2004; Belderbos, Leten,and Suzuki, 2013), while the subsequent development ofthese projects usually takes place in business units thathave a better understanding of market needs and canbuild on their experience to launch new products. Research projects produce research results—usually in the form of intermediate goods (e.g., prototypes,algorithms, models)—and transfer these intermediategoods to business units for further development andcommercialization. In this transfer process, research proj-ects operate as a cost center
andcommercialization. In this transfer process, research proj-ects operate as a cost center and function as the internalsuppliers of the intermediate goods (research output) tobusiness units. Business units, by contrast, act as a proﬁtcenter and represent the internal buyers of the researchresults of research projects (Chesbrough, Vanhaverbeke,and West, 2006). Business units have limited budgets tospend, and the proﬁts they make on the market depend onthe business success of the research outputs they choose totransfer in from research projects. As a result, businessunits have to constantly screen the quality of researchoutputs of research projects and select the most promisingones (Chesbrough et al., 2006). The ability of businessunits to make the right transfer decisions—to evaluate andselect the most promising research projects (and the inter-mediate goods they provide) in the early research phase when little information is known—is essential. An important element in the intra-ﬁrm transfer process from research projects to business units is the speed of theﬁrst transfer. Fast ﬁrst transfers have a signaling functionand may increase the conﬁdence of business units in theresearch project. In the existing NPD literature, productdevelopment speed or NPD cycle time refers to theoverall cycle time and has been pointed to as one of themost critical factors in the success of new product devel-opment (e.g., Brown and Eisenhardt, 1995; Cankurtaranet al., 2013; Schilling and Hill, 1998). Numerous studieshave elaborated on the importance of NPD speed, as ithelps the ﬁrm to establish technology standards, jumpahead on the learning curve, respond rapidly to customerneeds, and enjoy more alternatives than slower innovators(Cankurtaran et al., 2013; Chen, Damanpour, and Reilly,2010; Langerak and Hultink, 2006). However, little isknown about the speed of intra-ﬁrm research transfers by which research results are transferred from research proj-ects to business units, and the link
by which research results are transferred from research proj-ects to business units, and the link to the performance ofresearch projects. In the intra-ﬁrm research transfer process, research projects can adopt different strategies which may inﬂu-ence the transfer speed of their research results. Onestrategy is to open up and collaborate with external part-ners (Chesbrough, 2003; Grant and Baden-Fuller, 2004;Hagedoorn, 1993). The open innovation literature distin-guishes between two important types of external R&Dpartnerships: science-based and market-based partner-ships (Danneels, 2002; Du et al., 2014; Faems, Van Looy,and Debackere, 2005). Science-based partnershipsfeature collaborations with partners that have deep scien-tiﬁc knowledge, such as universities and research insti-tutes. These partnerships provide research projects accessto scientiﬁc knowledge (Cockburn and Henderson, 1998;Fabrizio, 2009). Market-based partnerships, on the otherhand, consist of players with a close link to the market,such as suppliers and customers (Danneels, 2002; Faemset al., 2005). Relationships with market-based playersprovide research projects with the latest technologies thatare available on the market and ﬁrst-hand informationabout the market needs (von Hippel and Katz, 2002).Access to external knowledge may be particularlyimportant for research projects that are conducted in“complex” technology ﬁelds where the new product con-sists of multiple components (Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh,2000; Harhoff and Reitzig, 2004) and in-house knowl-edge on some components is likely to be missing. Asecond strategy research projects may take to attractinterested business units is to ﬁle (early on) for patent RESEARCH TRANSFER SPEED J PROD INNOV MANAG 1183 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions
by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
protection of their research results. Research projects with early patent ﬁlings are attractive to business unitssince research ﬁndings are (partly) codiﬁed and, ifgranted, patents offer exclusive monopoly rights for theproducts that are introduced to the market (Arora andCeccagnoli, 2006; Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg, 2005). Hypotheses In this section, we develop hypotheses on the antecedentsand performance implications of transfer speed. We ﬁrstinvestigate the relationship between transfer speed andthe performance of research projects (H1). Next, weexamine three potentially inﬂuential factors of transferspeed: market-based partnerships (H2) and science-basedpartnerships (H3)—with the moderating effect of techno-logical complexity (H4), as well as early patent applica-tions (H5). Figure 1 provides a schematic overview of theresearch framework. Transfer Speed and the Performance of Research Projects The speed at which a research project transfers its ﬁrst research result to business units (transfer speed) can be animportant driver of the success of the research project, forthe following three reasons: First, a fast transfer speed may help to increase the conﬁdence of the sponsor about the ongoing research itsponsors. Research is characterized by high risks andgreat uncertainties. As a result, many research projectsfail to reach satisfying research outcomes. These“hanging” projects consume valuable resources. There-fore, the strategy “to detect and kill the failing projectsearly in the NPD process” (Cooper, 2008) is oftentimesput forward as a golden rule—which prompts for theefﬁcient use of valuable resources and cost savings, byunplugging less promising projects early on and redirect-ing resources to the more promising ones. Financial spon- sors of research projects (often business units) thereforehave to constantly screen the progress of their projectportfolio, and stop the further ﬁnancing of under-performing research projects. Research projects thatmanage to
stop the further ﬁnancing of under-performing research projects. Research projects thatmanage to quickly generate and transfer their ﬁrstresearch results give a strong signal to their sponsors andincrease their conﬁdence in the research projects they aresponsoring, which, in turn, may help the research projectsto secure further ﬁnancing, instead of being ﬁltered outearly in the research process. Second, fast ﬁrst transfers enable research projects to collect early feedback from recipient business units.Early feedback may serve as valuable input for theongoing research of the research projects and may helpthem to improve the quality of their work (von Hippel,1986). Third, research projects that have fast ﬁrstresearch transfers allow the recipient business units toseek a sharp product deﬁnition (Cooper and Edgett, 2012;Cooper, Edgett, and Kleinschmidt, 2004) and to learnbeforehand about the value creation possibilities of thetechnologies under research (Chesbrough, 2003). Fastﬁrst transfers may therefore help to increase the attrac-tiveness of the research results to potential recipient busi-ness units. In sum, we hypothesize that: H1: Research projects with a fast transfer of ﬁrst research results are linked to a better researchperformance. Market-Based Partnerships and Transfer Speed Market-based partnerships consist of players with a close link to the market, such as suppliers and customers(Danneels, 2002; Du et al., 2014; Faems et al., 2005).Market-based partners can help research projects to speedup the transfer of their ﬁrst research results, because ofthe following reasons: First, in research projects, deﬁning and clarifying a speciﬁc research question as well as setting clear-cutresearch goals (Grifﬁn, 1993) may take considerable timeif the project team is working on its own without a clearview on what the market wants. When partnering withmarket-based partners, the project team gets equippedwith up-to-date market information and timely adjust-ments of such
the project team gets equippedwith up-to-date market information and timely adjust-ments of such information (Ulwick, 2002; Woodruff,1997), which may enable the project team to detect andrespond faster to market needs, and thus, speed up thedevelopment and transfer of their ﬁrst research result tobusiness units. Second, market-based partners, and particularly lead customers, tend to be concerned with the timely execu- Market-based  Partnerships   Science-based  Partnerships  Project   Transfer Speed Project Research  PerformanceH 1 H 3 H 4H 2  Technology  Complexity   Patent  Application H 5 Figure 1. Conceptual Model1184 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
tion of research projects, as this helps to better serve their own needs (von Hippel, 1986). Such market-pull factors(Chidamber and Kon, 1994) may give additional momen-tum to the research team to speed up the development andtransfer of their ﬁrst research result to business units.Research projects that are conducted in collaborationwith market-based partners may also appear more appeal-ing to potential recipient business units, as these projectsare geared towards solving an (unmet) market need whichis veriﬁed by the market-based partners. Third, market-based partners provide market insights to the research project which enable early testing and fastfailing in the research process. As a result, possibilities ofrework and mistakes are reduced. A large portion of pro-longed research activities in the NPD process stem fromrework and mistakes (Kahn, Castellion, and Grifﬁn,2005). Market insights point out ways for improvementand adjustment before substantial rework is needed(Harrison and Waluszewski, 2008), and therefore mayreduce the time needed to develop and transfer ﬁrstresearch results. Taken together, we hypothesize: H2: Market-based partnerships enable research projects to speed up the transfer of ﬁrst research results. Science-Based Partnerships and Transfer Speed Next to market-based partners, research projects may also involve science-based partners (i.e., universities andresearch institutions) in their research process (Du et al.,2014; Rosenberg, 1990). Science-based partnerships mayenable research projects to speed up their ﬁrst researchtransfers, because of the following reasons: First, science-based partners bring the research project speciﬁc resources and scientiﬁc knowledge, which mayhelp to ﬁll in the research gaps the project is facing.Research projects may experience delays in executionjust because the key elements for the desired solution aremissing in-house. As research becomes increasinglycomplex and multi-disciplinary (Brusoni, Prencipe, andPavitt,
As research becomes increasinglycomplex and multi-disciplinary (Brusoni, Prencipe, andPavitt, 2001; Rycroft and Kash, 1999), it is likely thatﬁrms do not possess all the necessary capacities in-house(Narula and Hagedoorn, 1999). Slow innovators “rein-vent the wheel,” instead of actively building on knowl-edge that already exists (Chesbrough, 2003; Tao andMagnotta, 2006). On the contrary, science-based partner-ships may help research projects to speed up researchtransfers by leveraging ready-to-use knowledge and tech-nology from experienced scientiﬁc partners (Grant andBaden-Fuller, 2004). Second, collaborating with science-based partners may enable research projects to beneﬁt from a “divisionof labor,” i.e., the partitioning of research tasks among partners. Conducting research in parallel on differenttasks may reduce the time to generate transferableresearch outcomes. Constrained by resource limitations(Barczak, Grifﬁn, and Kahn, 2009; Grifﬁn, 1997), it maybe challenging for research projects to simultaneouslywork on all research tasks. By collaborating with science-based partners, the project team may leverage theresources and expertise of its partners by working inparallel with them, which may shorten the time needed inresearch. Consequently, science-based partners may helpto accelerate the ﬁrst transfer of research outcomes. Third, science-based partners who possess profound scientiﬁc knowledge may quickly spot ﬂaws in theresearch process and solve technical problems thatresearch projects are facing, which may contribute totransfer speed acceleration. Moreover, science-basedpartners can provide research projects with access toadvanced scientiﬁc equipment and research facilities (Duet al., 2014; Leten, Vanhaverbeke, Roijakkers, Clerix,and Van Helleputte, 2013), which may also accelerate thegeneration and transfer of research outcomes. Takentogether, we hypothesize: H3: Science-based partnerships enable research projects to speed up the transfer of ﬁrst research
H3: Science-based partnerships enable research projects to speed up the transfer of ﬁrst research results. R&D Partnerships and Technological Complexity Because of the distinctive nature of research projects, adopting a universal approach in all projects might not beeffective (Clift and Vandenbosch, 1999; Kessler andChakrabarti, 1999). One important dimension of differ-entiation is the technological complexity of research proj-ects. Cohen et al. (2000) distinguish between “complex”and “discrete” technologies. The key difference betweenboth types of technologies is whether the inventions are,respectively, comprised of multiple or relatively few pat-entable elements (Cohen et al., 2000). Research projects in complex technology ﬁelds focus on inventions with multiple functionalities (Grifﬁn,1997), and for which the overall understanding of all theencompassing components is typically low (Carbonelland Rodriguez, 2006). Research projects in complextechnology ﬁelds are expected to beneﬁt more from R&Dpartnerships. In complex technology ﬁelds, because newproducts typically consist of a large number of compo-nents, it is likely that knowledge on some components islacking in the ﬁrm. External R&D partnerships mayprovide research project teams in complex ﬁelds withknowledge on these speciﬁc component(s) that is unavail-able internally. Further, external R&D partners may alsoRESEARCH TRANSFER SPEED J PROD INNOV MANAG 1185 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
equip research projects with a better overall understand- ing of the technological and market space in which theysearch for solutions for the problems they are addressing(Carbonell and Rodriguez, 2006; Grifﬁn, 1997). As aresult, research projects in complex technological ﬁeldsmay beneﬁt more from external R&D partnerships inspeeding up research transfers. Moreover, in complex technology ﬁelds, multiple components interact with each other in determining thefunctionality of new products (Henderson and Clark,1990). Any single mistake or misﬁt of one technologycomponent may affect the functions of the overallproduct, resulting in unnecessary delays in product devel-opment. Collaborating with external partners helps theresearch project to access multi-disciplinary scientiﬁcand market knowledge, and to develop a “helicopterview” on different components and their interfaces in theknowledge architecture (Henderson and Clark, 1990). Asa result, it may speed up the development of (ﬁrst) trans-ferable research outcomes. In sum, we hypothesize: H4: Science-based and market-based partnerships have a larger effect on the speed of ﬁrst transfers of techno-logically complex projects. Patent Filings and Transfer Speed Besides engaging in R&D partnerships, another impor- tant decision a research project makes is whether andwhen to ﬁle for patents to legally protect its researchoutcomes. Early patent ﬁlings may accelerate the speedof ﬁrst research transfers, for the following reasons: First, research projects that apply for patents on their technologies may—if the patents get granted—improve the possibilities of the recipient business unit toappropriate economic value from the transferred tech-nologies, by offering them temporary monopoly rights onthe use of the technologies (Arora and Ceccagnoli, 2006;Kultti, Takalo, and Toikka, 2007). Patent protectionincreases the economic value of innovations, which isreferred to as the patent premium (Arora, Ceccagnoli, andCohen, 2008; Hall et
innovations, which isreferred to as the patent premium (Arora, Ceccagnoli, andCohen, 2008; Hall et al., 2005). Research projects whichhave already ﬁled for patent applications may be consid-ered as more attractive to business units and the earlyﬁlings of patents may therefore lead to faster ﬁrstresearch transfers. Second, research results are a combination of both tacit and codiﬁed knowledge (Kogut and Zander, 1993;Nonaka, 1994). To further develop and commercializeresearch results, the recipient business unit has to under-stand the transferred technologies. While codiﬁed knowl-edge can be easily transferred from one unit to another,tacit knowledge prevents efﬁcient sharing between differ- ent units (Almeida, Song, and Grant, 2002; Grant andBaden-Fuller, 2004), especially when these units are ofdistinct nature and are featured with a large cognitivedistance (Huber, 2012). This is particularly true forknowledge transfers from research projects to businessunits. When a research project ﬁles for patents, it engagesin efforts to (at least partly) codify tacit research resultsby providing detailed descriptions of the functions andmechanisms of the underlying technologies in the patentapplication ﬁle. These detailed descriptions, in turn, mayhelp the potential recipient business unit to better under-stand the transferred research results. Hence, early patentapplications are expected to lead to faster ﬁrst researchtransfers. This leads to the following hypothesis: H5: Early patent ﬁlings enable research projects to speed up the transfer of ﬁrst research results. Methodology Sample and Data Collection Detailed information on research projects from one large European R&D-intensive manufacturing ﬁrm is used inthis study. The sample ﬁrm invests heavily in R&D, withan annual R&D budget of more than one billion eurosconsecutively during all the sample years (2003–2010).There are several reasons as to why a single ﬁrm ischosen as the sample in this paper: First, in multiple
are several reasons as to why a single ﬁrm ischosen as the sample in this paper: First, in multiple ﬁrmstudies, each of the ﬁrms may develop (slightly) differentunderstanding of the research phase, transfer speed, andresearch performance. Given these differences, combin-ing various data sources to form a uniﬁed multi-ﬁrmdataset is not only challenging but may also engender lessaccurate results. Second, as the primary focus is on intra-ﬁrm transfers of intermediate goods (research outputs), asingle ﬁrm study enables us to better focus on the majorvariables of interest, ﬁltering out possible confoundingeffects at the “macro level” (e.g., ﬁrm level), such asinnovation policy and corporate culture. Third, a singleﬁrm study also allows us to dig deeper into the ﬁrm andget ﬁne-grained data, making it possible to collect data ona large set of control variables at the project level. Our dataset contains detailed information on 503 research projects that were initiated and executed in thedifferent research labs of the company during the 2003–2010 period. 2Instead of relying on subjective and retro- spective evaluations of managers, this study relies on 2The same data structure has been adopted in prior research (Du et al., 2014).1186 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
objective information that is collected from the internal databases of the sample ﬁrm, containing information onproject stafﬁng, project management and research out-comes (i.e., research transfers). Our dataset includes bothdata on successful and failed research projects (i.e., proj-ects that did not proceed on to the next stage of develop-ment). These research projects span many differenttechnological ﬁelds, covering all eight main InternationalPatent Classiﬁcation (IPC) 3technology ﬁelds (one-digit level) and 44 more detailed IPC technology ﬁelds (three-digit level). The ﬁve top-ranked technological ﬁelds inour sample of projects are: G06 (computing, calculating,and counting), A61 (medical science), H04 (electric com-munication), G01 (measuring and testing), and H01(basic electrical elements). The starting date and ending date (in case projects are ended before 2010) of each research project is recorded.A research project can end either because it achieved itsresearch goal, or simply because the sponsor decides toterminate it. During the execution of a research project,research results can be achieved at any point in time. Ifperceived as valuable by business units, these researchresults are transferred to interested business units who arewilling to commit resources (i.e., time, money, people) tofurther develop and commercialize them into new prod-ucts and services. As a result, a research project maygenerate multiple research transfers during its lifetime. Aresearch transfer implies that a research result is takenover by a business unit, and for which there is docu-mented evidence of its intended use by this recipient.More speciﬁcally, a “transfer” has to fulﬁll the followingcriteria:  A transfer involves a written transfer plan agreed between the research project and the business unit.  A transfer coincides with a wrap-up of activity in the business unit that aims to utilize the knowledge beingtransferred from the research project.  A transfer must conclude
to utilize the knowledge beingtransferred from the research project.  A transfer must conclude with an agreement from the receiving business unit that the transfer has taken placeand that the transfer is complete. While there are differences across transfers in the type of research outcomes that are transferred (prototypes,algorithms, models, etc.), the above-mentioned criteriaensure that transfers are comparable and can be used asan indicator of the performance of research projects. Thiswas conﬁrmed in interviews with managers of our sample company, as it uses the number of transfers as key per-formance indicators of research projects. Research projects are initiated by either one of the Business Units of the ﬁrm, or by Corporate Research . Business Units earn their proﬁts from product sales, andmainly sponsor research that is geared towards clearmarket needs. Corporate Research is the unit of the ﬁrmthat manages the research labs. It has an annual R&Dbudget to sponsor research projects that are of strategicimportance to the ﬁrm, and which are more generalpurpose in nature (e.g., platform technologies which donot cater to the speciﬁc needs of any business unit). Abouthalf of the research projects are sponsored by BusinessUnits, and the rest are sponsored by Corporate Research. There are various types of business units within the ﬁrm that act as recipients of research transfers. Mostbusiness units are organized around speciﬁc productgroups. Besides the main business units that deal withthe core business of the ﬁrm, the New Business Devel-opment (NBD) department explores the internal use oftechnologies that fall outside the scope of the ﬁrm’sexisting business ﬁelds. The Incubator department incu-bates early-stage technologies that have the potential togrow into a new business later on. The businessdepartments—IP & Standards and Licensing—deal withexternal third parties and are responsible for licensing outor selling technologies that result from research
parties and are responsible for licensing outor selling technologies that result from research projectsfor which there is no direct interest of the internal busi-ness units in commercializing them. Business units that have received research transfers are often the sponsors of the transferring research projects,but other business units can also ask for transfer(s) ofresearch results, if perceived as valuable to their business.We have illustrated the transfer process for one hypotheti-cal research project in Figure 2. This research project wasinitiated by Business Unit 1 and has generated threeresearch transfers. The ﬁrst two transfers were requestedby Business Unit 1 (the sponsor) while the third transferwas transferred to Business Unit 2. This project also ﬁledfor two patents, one preceding the ﬁrst research transfer,and one between the ﬁrst and the second researchtransfer. Methodology We have conducted two different types of empiricalanalyses: Transfer speed and project research performance. To investigate the relationship between the speed of3IPC is a hierarchical technology classiﬁcation that follows a tiered structure to classify inventions into technology ﬁelds. At the most detailedlevel (represented by an eight-digit code), IPC differentiates between70,000 technologies. These technologies are aggregated into subclasses(four-digit code), classes (three-digit code), and sections (one-digit code).RESEARCH TRANSFER SPEED J PROD INNOV MANAG 1187 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
a ﬁrst research transfer and project research performance, we used the Heckman two-step selection model. Sincetransfer speed can only be measured for research projectsthat generated at least one transfer, the performanceanalysis is limited to the subset of projects ( n=170) which have research transfer(s). The remainingun-transferred projects—which may also have the poten-tial to generate a transfer but are however not observed inour sample—are left out. To control for selection effectsdue to the nonrandom nature of the subset of projectswith transfers, the Heckman two-step selection model isemployed in the study. We ﬁrst estimated the probability that research pro- jects generated at least one research transfer—and forwhom transfer speed could be calculated—using data onthe full sample of 503 projects. We used the dummyvariable “sponsor department” as selection variable. Thisvariable takes the value 1 if a research project was spon-sored by Corporate Research, and the value 0 when oneof the ﬁrm’s Business Units sponsored the research. Weexpect that, compared to research projects that are spon-sored by Corporate Research, research projects that aresponsored by Business Units are more likely to generatea research transfer. This is because Business Unit spon-sors focus on technologies that are directly related to theirbusiness needs; therefore, technologies that are spon-sored by them are more likely to be transferred to them(i.e., the sponsor of the project) to ﬁll in their needs. Thisis not the case for projects sponsored by CorporateResearch, as they focus more on technologies that aregeneral purpose in nature, and which are not directlylinked to the needs of one speciﬁc business unit.However, despite the expected higher likelihood for Busi-ness Unit sponsored projects to generate one researchtransfer, there are no clear theoretical reasons to expectsystematic differences in the overall performance (mea-sured by the total number of transfers) of research proj- ects
in the overall performance (mea-sured by the total number of transfers) of research proj- ects that have different types of corporate sponsors. 4As a result, the variable “Sponsor department” qualiﬁes as aselection variable. In the second step, we estimated therelationship between transfer speed and research projectperformance for the subset of 170 research projects, con-trolling for the possible selection effects by including theinverse Mills ratio from the selection equation in the ﬁrststep. Data on project transfers is used to measure the per- formance of research projects. A transfer signals the com-mitment of the recipient business unit and its willingnessto invest (time, money, people) in further developing andcommercializing the research output. Hence, transferscan be considered as positive evaluation by business unitsof the value creation potential of the speciﬁc researchoutput generated by the research project. In this way,project research transfers serve as a valuable indicator ofproject research performance. The larger the number ofresearch transfers the research project delivers to businessunits, the better the (perceived) performance of theresearch project. To control for the skewed nature of thisvariable, we used the logarithmic transformation of thenumber of research transfers as our dependent variable. Antecedents of transfer speed. To explore factors that may affect the (ﬁrst) transfer speed of research projects,we used event history analysis, also known as survivalanalysis. Event history analysis has been frequently usedin prior studies where “speed” or “time” was the focalvariable of interest (e.g., Schoonhoven, Eisenhardt, andLyman, 1990; Zander and Kogut, 1995). Event historyanalysis has several advantages in time-related studies: 4We have empirically tested this assumption. The dummy variable “sponsor department” is insigniﬁcant when included in the performanceequation, using data of the subset of 170 research projects.BU 1 BU 2  Start
in the performanceequation, using data of the subset of 170 research projects.BU 1 BU 2  Start EndTransfer 1 Transfer 2  Transfer 3   Patent  Application 1  Patent  Application 2   Legend:  BU — Business Unit Research (R)Development (D)   Figure 2. Transfer Flow and Research Flow of a Research Project1188 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
First, it takes into account both the occurrence and the timing of an event while estimating the effects ofexplanatory variable. Second, it takes care of right-handcensoring problems. The dependent variable measures how fast a research project generates a ﬁrst transfer (the hazard that a projectreaches an event—a transfer). We opted for the Cox pro-portional hazard model (Cox, 1972) in this set of analy-ses, since this model requires no upfront assumptionconcerning the distribution of the hazard rate of projecttransfers. The Cox model allows the baseline hazard to beﬁtted from the data. The Cox model speciﬁes the hazardthat a project delivers a research transfer as the product ofa baseline hazard h(t) and a project-speciﬁc hazard, withthe latter modeled as an exponential function of themodel parameters β xand regressors x ij: ht | x ht x ij ij x( ) ( ).exp( . ) = β To control for possible unobserved project-speciﬁc effects such as differences in project tasks, managementstyles, and team capabilities, we augmented the Coxmodel with a stochastic project-level component α i (Blossfeld, Golsch, and Rohwer, 2007). This project- level component, or shared frailty term, enters the hazardfunction in a multiplicative manner and has a mean of 1and a variance of θ. As we have detailed information about the start and transfer date of each transfer, weperformed our analysis at the monthly level. We alsospeciﬁed the exit time of those projects that were endedbefore the end of our observation window. Variables Transfer speed. In the Heckman selection model, we measure transfer speed as the time from the start of aresearch project to its ﬁrst transfer of research results. Inline with our dependent variable in the Cox proportionalhazard model this variable is detailed at the monthlylevel. By the end of our observation period in 2010, 170of the 503 research projects generated research transfers.The remaining research projects were either still ongoingor ended without generating any
transfers.The remaining research projects were either still ongoingor ended without generating any research transfer. Theaverage speed of ﬁrst research transfers for the 170 trans-ferring projects is 1.35 years. Science-based and market-based partnerships. We have annual information on the involvement of externalpartners in research projects. More speciﬁcally, weknow—for each project and year—whether it collabo-rated with science-based (i.e., universities and researchinstitutions) and/or market-based partners (i.e., customers and suppliers). Science-based and market-based partner-ships are both binary variables that take a value “1” ifcollaboration with the speciﬁc type of partners took placein the research project up to the observation year, and “0”otherwise. In our sample of 503 projects, 286 projects(56.9%) collaborated with both types of partners, 78projects (15.5%) only with science-based partners, 68projects (13.5%) only with market-based partners, andthe remaining 71 projects (14.1%) had no external R&Dpartnerships. Project patent application. Project patent application is a variable indicating the number of patent ﬁlings byresearch projects. The variable is measured annually andindicates the number of patents applied for by theresearch project at the European Patent Ofﬁce (EPO) upto the observation year. We focus on EPO patent appli-cations because our sample ﬁrm is headquartered inEurope and follows the EPO system for the majority of itspatent applications. Technological complexity. Technological complexity measures the average complexity of the technologies thatare under development in a research project. Technolo-gies are considered complex when they focus on inven-tions that comprise multiple functionalities (Grifﬁn,1997) and patentable elements (Cohen et al., 2000). Priorliterature measured the complexity of technology ﬁeldsby the average number of patent claims 5in patents of that ﬁeld (Cohen et al., 2000; Harhoff and Reitzig, 2004). Toconstruct the
claims 5in patents of that ﬁeld (Cohen et al., 2000; Harhoff and Reitzig, 2004). Toconstruct the complexity measure, we ﬁrst calculated theaverage number of patent claims in each different IPCfour-digit technology ﬁeld, using data on the worldwidestock of EPO patent applications per ﬁeld during theperiod 2000–2010. 6Second, after having identiﬁed the technological complexity of each IPC ﬁeld, we calculatedthe technological complexity of a particular researchproject as the average complexity of the different tech-nologies encompassed by that research project. Moredetails on the classiﬁcation of research projects to theirrespective technology ﬁelds can be found in the sectionon control variables. Two different cut-off values to dif-ferentiate between less and more complex projects areused in this paper: the 50th and 75th percentile of thecomplexity values in our sample. 5Patent claims provide clear and concise deﬁnitions of what the patent legally protects (OECD, 2009). 6There are approximately 640 different IPC four-digit technology ﬁelds.RESEARCH TRANSFER SPEED J PROD INNOV MANAG 1189 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Control Variables We added the following set of control variables to our analyses: Project resources. Project resources have been pointed out as a critical factor determining projectsuccess or failure (Barczak et al., 2009; Carbonell andRodriguez, 2006). We use the (log-transformed) numberof full time equivalent researchers (FTE) working on aresearch project as proxy of the size and the resourceendowments of the research project. This variable isrecorded on a yearly basis and is calculated in a cumula-tive way by adding FTEs over the research project’slifetime up to the observation year. Project technological ﬁelds. We use a set of dummy variables to denote the technological ﬁelds in which theresearch project is classiﬁed. Research projects thatfocus on different technological ﬁelds may face differ-ent challenges and generate distinct outcomes (Hall,Link, and Scott, 2003). We have followed a two-stepapproach to classify projects into their respective tech-nology ﬁelds: First, for projects that have applied forpatents, the technology class (IPC) information on theirpatent application ﬁles is used. If a patent contains mul-tiple technology classes, a project is assigned tomultiple technology ﬁelds. Second, the remaining proj-ects that have not (yet) applied for a patent are manuallyassigned to technology ﬁelds by using information onthe project’s content from the project titles, abstracts,and descriptions. Technology ﬁelds with a low numberof projects are grouped together into a rest category inthe analyses. Length of the research project. Project duration is another important factor that may affect the performanceof research projects. For instance, projects that last longermay enjoy more time for research, and thus have a higherpossibility to generate (more) transfers. In this paper, weuse the number of months a research project lasts as themeasure for project duration. This variable has beenreferred to as research cycle time in prior research (e.g.,Eling et al.,
This variable has beenreferred to as research cycle time in prior research (e.g.,Eling et al., 2013). Firm patent stock. This variable represents the tech- nical strength of the ﬁrm in the technology ﬁeld(s) towhich a research project belongs. Technical competencesof the ﬁrm in the ﬁeld under research are expected to be(at least partly) accessible to the project team. We take theﬁve-year prior patent stock of the sample ﬁrm to measurethe technical strength of the ﬁrm in the relevant technol- ogy ﬁelds of the research project (Du et al., 2014). Wehave collected EPO patent data for the sample ﬁrm at theconsolidated level, including patents that were assignedto the parent company or to its majority-owned subsid-iaries. The consolidation was done on a yearly basis totake into account changes in the ﬁrm group structure.Patents of subsidiaries that are acquired and divested are,respectively, added and removed from the patent stockfrom the year of acquisition or divestment. Due to thelong time-windows of patent granting decisions at theEPO, 7we use patent application data to construct ﬁrm patent stock. Project management formality. Following prior research (e.g., Cooper et al., 2004; Du et al., 2014), wecontrol for the extent to which research projects havefollowed a formalized management process; that is, theresearch projects were planned, monitored, and con-trolled in a formal way by the project management team.The management process of each project is evaluatedannually by the project manager. In line with prior work(Du et al., 2014), scores from 0 to 5 (a score of “0”means that the activity is not performed; a score of “5”indicates that great importance is given to the activity)are provided for each of the following three project man-agement activities: (1) regular review of the projectprocess, involving management, project owner, andproject sponsors; (2) during project reviews, correctiveactions are identiﬁed, documented, and tracked throughto project completion; (3)
reviews, correctiveactions are identiﬁed, documented, and tracked throughto project completion; (3) progress reports are madeavailable at the project level on a regular basis, includinginformation on project termination and transferredresults. The project management formality score is cal-culated as the average score on these three questions forprojects that last longer than one year; the average scoreover time is used. A higher score implies that the projectis managed in a more formal way by the project man-agement team. Number of projects under management. The more projects a project leader is actively managing, the lesstime he or she may devote to each individual project,which may negatively affect project performance(Geanakoplos and Milgrom, 1991). Projects that receivemore attention from their manager may enjoy timelyfeedback and generate faster research transfers. We usethe number of projects that a project leader is managing 7Patent granting decisions at the EPO take on average more than ﬁve years (Harhoff and Wagner, 2009).1190 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
concurrently in a certain year as proxy for the managerial attention of each individual project. Sponsor department. In our data, research projects can be initiated by two types of sponsor units, i.e.,Corporate Research (51% of sample projects), or any of theBusiness Units of the ﬁrm (49% of sample proj- ects). 8The variable sponsor department is a dummy variable, taking the variable 1 if a project is initiated byCorporate Research, and 0 otherwise. As explained indetail in the Methodology section, this variable alsofunctions as the selection variable in the two-stepHeckman estimations. Project initiating year. Project initiating year refers to the year in which a research project started. This variablemay signal the macroeconomic situations at a particularpoint in time, but it may also absorb the effects of changesin corporate level strategy. We include a range of dummyvariables to control for project initiating years. Table 1 gives a brief description of the variables we used in this study. Appendix A and Appendix B showthe descriptive statistics and correlations for the depen-dent and explanatory variables in the event historyanalysis and in the Heckman two-step estimations,respectively.Empirical Results Transfer Speed and the Performance of Research Projects We ﬁrst analyze the relationship between transfer speed and the performance of research projects.9Table 2 reports the results of the Heckman two-step regression model.Model 1 shows the selection result for the ﬁrst step:whether a project generates a transfer or not. It includesthe control variables and the selection variable (SponsorDepartment). As expected, the coefﬁcient of the selectionvariable is negative and signiﬁcant, conﬁrming thatresearch sponsored by Corporate Research has a lowerprobability to generate research transfer(s). Projects thathave more resources and that can build on a large ﬁrm-level patent stock have a higher probability to generate aresearch transfer. The results further show that
stock have a higher probability to generate aresearch transfer. The results further show that researchprojects that are managed in a more formal way are morelikely to generate a research transfer to business units. Model 2 is the second step of the Heckman model where we regress the performance of research projects ontransfer speed (as measured by the number of months aproject takes to generate a ﬁrst research transfer). Wecontrol for the possible selection bias by including theinverse Mills ratio in the equation. The inverse Mills ratio 8Models with separate dummies for the 10 business units give very similar results.9We used the “number of research transfers after the ﬁrst delivery” as an alternative dependent variable. This speciﬁcation gave qualitatively thesame results.Table 1. Variable Deﬁnitions, Measures, and Categories Variable Name Measure Type Performance of research projects The number of transfers the research project generates Count (log transformed) Research transfer speed The speed of the ﬁrst transfer from research project to business unit ContinuousScience-based partnerships Collaboration with science-based partners BinaryMarket-based partnerships Collaboration with market-based partners BinaryProject patent application Number of patent applications at EPO CountTechnological complexity Technological complexity of the technology ﬁeld to which the research project belongsBinary Project resources Full time equivalent (FTE) researchers work on a project Count (log transformed) Project technological ﬁelds The technological ﬁelds the project is active in DummyLength of the research project The number of years a research project lasts CountFirm patent stock Previous ﬁve-year patent stock of the ﬁrm in the technological ﬁeld to which the project belongContinuous (log transformed) Project management formality Average score of project management proﬁciency on (1) regular review of the project process, (2) corrective actions during projectreviews, (3)
on (1) regular review of the project process, (2) corrective actions during projectreviews, (3) progress reports0–5 Likert scale Number of projects under management Number of projects a project leader is actively managing Count (log transformed) Sponsor department The sponsor of the project: Corporate Research or one of the Business UnitsBinary Project initiating year The year in which the research project is initiated DummyRESEARCH TRANSFER SPEED J PROD INNOV MANAG 1191 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
is signiﬁcant, showing that without controlling for this variable, our performance equation would suffer from asample selection bias. We also control for the length ofthe research project. The coefﬁcient of the transfer speedvariable is negative and signiﬁcant, conﬁrming H1:Research projects with a fast ﬁrst transfer (less monthsneeded to generate a ﬁrst transfer) to business units areassociated with a better research performance. 10Model 2 also shows that projects with a longer research cycle timeperform, on average, better than their counterparts with ashorter research cycle time. Antecedents of Transfer Speed Table 3 reports the regression results of Cox sharedfrailty analyses for the impact of market-based partner-ships, science-based partners, and (early) patent ﬁlings onthe transfer speed of ﬁrst research results. As the Coxmodel measures the rate at which a ﬁrst transfer is deliv- ered, a positive (negative) coefﬁcient indicates that thevariable accelerates (decelerates) transfer speed. Model 1is the baseline model with only control variables. Theresults suggest that projects that have more resources andthat are managed by project leaders who simultaneouslymanage multiple projects are linked to faster ﬁrst researchtransfers. Further, we ﬁnd that projects that are sponsoredby Corporate Research take a longer time to transfer theirﬁrst research results (have a slower transfer speed). The market-based and science-based partnership vari- ables are added to Model 2. A positive and signiﬁcanteffect is found for market-based partnerships on projecttransfer speed. This conﬁrms H2: Market-based partner-ships accelerate the transfer speed of ﬁrst research results.The regression results show that market-based partner-ships accelerate transfer speed by 69.55% ( =exp [.528]- 1). However, we do not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant effect forscience-based partnerships on project transfer speed. As aresult, we do not ﬁnd empirical support for H3, thatscience-based partnerships (universally)
As aresult, we do not ﬁnd empirical support for H3, thatscience-based partnerships (universally) speed up ﬁrstresearch transfers. Further, we add the patent application variable to our speciﬁcations in Model 3 and Model 4, respectively. Thecoefﬁcient of this variable is positive and signiﬁcant inboth models. This conﬁrms H4 that early patent ﬁlings inresearch projects speed up the transfer of ﬁrst researchresults to business units. The coefﬁcient shows that eachadditional patent application accelerates the transferspeed by 4.3% ( =exp [.042]-1). The inclusion of the patent variable has no material effect on the R&D part-nership variables. Finally, technological complexity is included as the moderating variable of market-based and science-basedpartnerships in Model 5 and Model 6. In Model 5, we usethe medium sample value of complexity (50th percentile)as cut-off value for technological complexity. In Model 6,we raise the bar of technological complexity to the 75thpercentile to differentiate between technologically verycomplex projects and the rest. The complexity variable isnegative and signiﬁcant in both models, indicating thatresearch projects that focus on complex technologies, ingeneral, take more time to transfer ﬁrst research results.The results further show that collaborations with market-based partners in general speed up the transfer process.Interestingly, while science-based partnerships do notuniversally speed up the transfer process of research proj-ects, they have an acceleration effect on projects that dealwith very complex technologies (as indicated by the posi-tive interaction effect in Model 6). Thus, H5 is only partlysupported: technological complexity only moderates the 10We also tested the possibility of a nonlinear relationship between transfer speed and project performance. However, no evidence of a curvi-linear relationship was found.Table 2. Heckman Two-Step Regressions on Transfer Speed and Performance of Research Projects VariablesModel
Heckman Two-Step Regressions on Transfer Speed and Performance of Research Projects VariablesModel Coefﬁcient Standard Error Selection equation (Model 1) Sponsor department −.460*** (.135) Project management formality .154* (.085)Firm patent stock .0937* (.0534)Project resources .721*** (.182)# Projects under management .123 (.1018)Constant 2.653 (1.994)Performance equation (Model 2)Transfer speed −.0308*** (.0062) Length of the project .0211*** (.0038)Project management formality −.0382 (.117) Firm patent stock .0094 (.0649)Project resources −.1581 (.254) # Projects under management −.0176 (.1313) Technology ﬁelds Included Included Initiating year dummies Included Included Constant −4.375*** (.772) Mills ratio −.892** (.435) Number of observations 503Number of censored observations 333Number of uncensored observations 170Wald test: χ 288.79*** Robust standard errors in parentheses: *** p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.1.1192 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
relationship between science-based partnerships and transfer speed. Conclusion and Discussions This paper focuses on the organization of R&D activitiesin large, R&D-intensive ﬁrms. In these ﬁrms, research istypically conducted in research projects within researchlabs. Product development, on the other hand, isexecuted by business units. Once research results areachieved, they are transferred from research projects tobusiness units for further development and commercial-ization. We investigated the antecedents of transfer speed(the time a research project takes to deliver its ﬁrstresearch result to a business unit) and the relationshipbetween transfer speed and the performance of researchprojects (measured by the total number of transfers a project generates). We found that fast ﬁrst research transfers are linked to a better research performance. Fast ﬁrst transfers give astrong positive signal to the project sponsors, increasingtheir conﬁdence in the research project they sponsor andtheir willingness to further fund their ongoing research.Moreover, a fast ﬁrst transfer enables research projects tocollect early feedback from business units, which can beused to improve their ongoing research. R&D partner-ships are found to be useful—under some conditions—tospeed up research transfers. While market-based partner-ships have a general positive effect on transfer speed, thespeeding-up effect of science-based partners is limited toprojects conducted in very complex technology ﬁelds.Furthermore, this study provides evidence that earlyTable 3. Cox Shared Frailty Regressions on the Antecedents of Project Transfer Speed Variables Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Market-based partnership (MB) .528*** .549*** .591** .567** (.201) (.205) (.302) (.232) Science-based partnership (SB) .0391 .0490 .078 −.139 (.197) (.201) (.295) (.225) Project patent applications .0423** .0449** .048** .0470** (.0183) (.0187) (.019) (.0192) Complexity (50th percentile) −.885* (.464)
.0449** .048** .0470** (.0183) (.0187) (.019) (.0192) Complexity (50th percentile) −.885* (.464) MB* complexity (50th percentile) .029 (.418) SB* complexity (50th percentile) .007 (.415) Complexity (75th percentile) −1.468** (.614) MB* complexity (75th percentile) −.0457 (.518) SB* complexity (75th percentile) .983* (.549) Project management formality .185 .173 .194 .169 .156 .150 (.114) (.119) (.120) (.122) (.127) (.129) Sponsoring department −.742*** −.734*** −.782*** −.732*** −.789*** −.768*** (.166) (.180) (.179) (.184) (.191) (.189) Firm patent stock .110 .143* .119 .138* .159* .130 (.075) (.0792) (.0791) (.0811) (.086) (.0845) Project resources .630*** .644*** .616*** .545** .666*** .602*** (.175) (.210) (.214) (.223) (.235) (.232) # Projects under management .734*** .824*** .831*** .849*** .929*** .900*** (.171) (.190) (.190) (.196) (.202) (.202) Project technological ﬁelds Included Included Included Included Included Included Project initiating year Included Included Included Included Included Included Observations 13,308 13,308 13,308 13,308 13,308 13,308Number of groups 503 503 503 503 503 503Number of events 170 170 170 170 170 170Log likelihood −911.7 −907.7 −909.0 −905.0 −901.06 −900.6 Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.1.RESEARCH TRANSFER SPEED J PROD INNOV MANAG 1193 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
patent ﬁlings by research projects accelerate the transfer of ﬁrst research results to business units. Somewhat surprisingly, we did not ﬁnd a universal acceleration effect of science-based partnerships on thetransfer of ﬁrst research results. This ﬁnding deservesfurther considerations. In R&D partnerships, coordina-tion may take substantial time when partners have diversegoals (Lorange, Roos, and Brønn, 1992), differentworking habits (Bstieler and Hemmert, 2010), anddistinct organizational cultures and thought worlds(Dougherty, 1992). In such situations, coordination andcommunication complexities (Gulati, 1998; Rothaermeland Deeds, 2006) may offset the potential beneﬁts ofpartnerships on transfer speed, or even extend the time toreach research transfers. These factors are likely to differaccording to the type of R&D partners involved. Forscience-based partners, bureaucratic hierarchy, inﬂexibil-ity, and different rewarding systems (Mowery, 1998) areexpected to hinder their efﬁciency in research transfers.Frictions resulting from different organizational culturesand perceptions (Bstieler and Hemmert, 2010) may alsoarise. Furthermore, science-based partners are ofteninvolved in government-funded projects (e.g., EuropeanFP-7 projects) which have complex administrationsystems and reporting formalities (quarterly or yearly).As a result, the ﬁrm and its science-based partnersinvolved in such projects are constrained in the transferprocess, as the structure and process are predeterminedby the government. These abovementioned factors mayjointly offer an explanation as to why we did not ﬁnd ageneral positive effect of science-based partnerships ontransfer speed. However, we ﬁnd an accelerating effect of science- based partnerships for a speciﬁc set of research projects,namely those that focus on (very) complex technologies.Drawing from their expertise in scientiﬁc research,science-based partners are well positioned to develop a“helicopter view” on complex technologies that
partners are well positioned to develop a“helicopter view” on complex technologies that consistof multiple components in complex product architectures(Fleming and Sorenson, 2004; Rosenberg, 1990). Thisenables them to sort out the intricate relations betweentechnology components and to speed up the developmentof transferable research outcomes. In general, the situatedeffect of science-based partnerships should be interpretedwith caution. It might be that, although science-basedpartners do not (universally) accelerate research transfers,the research results of projects they are involved in aremore innovative and/or of greater impact. In other words,the beneﬁts of science-based partners might be material-ized in a different way, i.e., via more impactful innova-tions or higher ﬁnancial returns (e.g., Du et al., 2014).In addition, we found that projects that share their project leader with multiple other projects generate fasterresearch transfers. This seemingly unexpected result maybe interpreted as follows: the variable “number of proj-ects managed” may signal the attention each researchproject gets from its manager; but at the same time, it mayalso signal the scope of the research project, and thepossible cross-fertilization across different projects theproject leader is managing. On the contrary, the projectswhich are managed by one (dedicated) project manager,although getting the most managerial attention (as theyare handled by project managers who have limitednumber of projects at hand), may take longer to transfertheir ﬁrst research results. Theoretical Implications This paper contributes to the NPD literature, in particularthe research on NPD cycle time, in several ways. First, weintroduce a new concept of speed—the speed of intra-ﬁrm research transfers from research projects to businessunits. Prior research on cycle time predominantly took amonolithic view on cycle time by studying the speed ofthe entire NPD process from ideation all the way down toproduct
cycle time by studying the speed ofthe entire NPD process from ideation all the way down toproduct market launch (e.g., Cankurtaran et al., 2013;Chen et al., 2010). Consequently, “little is known aboutthe speciﬁc effects of the cycle times of the different NPDstages on NPD performance,” which “emphasizes theneed to conduct performance effect studies of NPD cycletime at the stage level rather than at the monolithicprocess level” (Eling et al., 2013, p. 626). We focused inthis paper on the research phase of NPD and more spe-ciﬁcally, the speed whereby research projects generateand transfer a ﬁrst set of research results to business units.As such, this paper contributes to the development of abetter and more nuanced understanding of NPD cycletime. Second, this paper contributes to the recent debatein cycle time studies whether having a shorter cycle timeis beneﬁcial or disadvantageous to NPD performance(Swink, Talluri, and Pandejpong, 2006). We ﬁnd that, atleast for the speed of ﬁrst research transfers, there is apositive relationship with performance. Third, this papercontributed to the NPD literature by introducing a newconceptual lens—the speed of research transfers—tomake early assessments of NPD performance. In doingso, this paper also adds to the intra-ﬁrm transactiontheory by emphasizing the importance of a fast deliveryof intermediate goods in intra-ﬁrm transactions betweenresearch projects and business units. Besides adding to the NPD literature, this paper also contributes to the open innovation literature by showing1194 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
hard evidence of the effect of R&D partnerships on the transfer speed of research projects. Responding to the callof Chesbrough et al. (2006) that “neither the practice ofnor research on open innovation are limited to the levelof the ﬁrm” (p. 287), in this paper we analyzed openinnovation at a more reﬁned level, being the projectlevel (Chesbrough, Vanhaverbeke, and West, 2014;Vanhaverbeke et al., 2014). Moreover, this paper added tothe existing open innovation literature by investigatingthe “time” aspect—the effect on transfer speed—of dif-ferent open innovation partnerships. Despite the burgeon-ing studies on the effects of open innovation on a widerange of performance dimensions, such as ﬁnancials (Duet al., 2014), cost savings (Knudsen and Mortensen,2011), number and share of innovative products (Faemset al., 2005; Laursen and Salter, 2006), whether R&Dpartnerships increase the time efﬁciency of the NPDprocess remained an open question in the open innovationliterature. In this paper, we made a ﬁrst contribution tothis line of research by empirically studying the effect ofdifferent types of open innovation partnerships (market-based and science-based partnerships) on the speed ofﬁrst research transfers. The ﬁndings help to develop amore holistic understanding about the effects of openinnovation. Managerial Implications Several managerial implications can be drawn from thisstudy. This paper shows that, when little information isavailable in the early research phase for project sponsorsto assess the potential of research projects, a good strat-egy for research projects is to have an early ﬁrst researchtransfer. Instead of being prudent in continuing to reﬁneinitial research results, the research project may actuallybe better off if presenting initial research results to busi-ness units early on in the research process. A fast ﬁrsttransfer can improve the conﬁdence of the projectsponsor on the capabilities of the research project, which,in turn, gives the research
the projectsponsor on the capabilities of the research project, which,in turn, gives the research project a better position tonegotiate additional research funding to sustain its furtherresearch. Next, regarding the strategic choices of a research project to speed up its transfer of research outcomes, ourﬁndings suggest that collaboration with external R&Dpartners is no panacea under all circumstances when itcomes to speeding up research transfers. Instead, theeffect of R&D partnerships on the transfer speed ofresearch projects depends on the type of partners involvedin the collaboration process and the technological com-plexity of the research project. Market-based partnershipsin general contribute to fast ﬁrst research transfers, while science-based partnerships are found to be only beneﬁcialin accelerating ﬁrst research transfers of technologicallyvery complex projects. As a result, R&D managers inlarge, R&D-intensive ﬁrms need to choose the type ofpartners based on the objectives and the characteristics ofthe research project. Other factors hold equal, for projectsin less complex technology ﬁelds, if there is time pressureto quickly transfer research results, teaming up withmarket-based partners may be a better strategy, comparedto collaborating with science-based partners. While fortechnologically very complex projects, both types ofexternal partnerships are helpful to speed up ﬁrst researchtransfers. Last but not least, our research results suggest that, in terms of transfer speed, it is beneﬁcial for a researchproject to ﬁle patents early on in the research process, asearly patent ﬁlings are instrumental in speeding up ﬁrstresearch transfers. Early patent applications help tocodify research results, and facilitate knowledge ﬂowsbetween the research team and the potential businessrecipients. Moreover, early patent applications alsoprovide an option to legally protect technologies underresearch, improving the attractiveness to business units. Limitations and
protect technologies underresearch, improving the attractiveness to business units. Limitations and Future Research Although we handled our research with great care, thisstudy has several limitations. First, beyond the factorsthat we included in our conceptual model, there may beother factors that determine the speed of ﬁrst researchtransfers. We encourage scholars to further enrich ourconceptual framework by studying additional determi-nants of transfer speed, such as the potential role of inter-nal partnerships between research projects and businessunits. Research projects that have strong internal links to(multiple) business units may be better positioned to ﬁndrecipients for their research results and therefore to speedup research transfers. Second, our dataset does not allow us to gain insights on the identity of external partners of research projects.This limitation prevents us from performing a more ﬁne-grained analysis on the role of R&D partnerships inspeeding up transfers and from including measures on thequality of partner involvement. We believe that splittingR&D partnerships into more ﬁnely grained categorieswill help to further improve our understanding on the roleof R&D partnerships. Further, we encourage futurestudies to explore the interplay of market-based andscience-based partnerships with respect to transfer speed.Of special interest is the question whether both types ofRESEARCH TRANSFER SPEED J PROD INNOV MANAG 1195 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
R&D partnerships act as complements or substitutes to each other. Finally, it may be interesting to check to whatextent our results hold across different ﬁrms and indus-tries than our sample ﬁrm. References Allen, F., and G. Faulhaber. 1988. Optimism invites deception. The Quar- terly Journal of Economics 103 (2): 397–407. Almeida, P., J. Song, and R. Grant. 2002. Are ﬁrms superior to alliances and markets? An empirical test of cross-border knowledge building. Orga- nization Science 13 (2): 147–61. Argyres, N. S., and B. S. Silverman. 2004. R&D, organization structure, and the development of corporate technological knowledge. Strategic Management Journal 25 (8–9): 929–58. Arora, A., and M. Ceccagnoli. 2006. Patent protection, complementary assets, and ﬁrms’ incentives for technology licensing. Management Science 52 (2): 293–308. Arora, A., M. Ceccagnoli, and W. M. Cohen. 2008. R&D and the patent premium. International Journal of Industrial Organization 26 (5): 1153–79. Barczak, G., A. Grifﬁn, and K. B. Kahn. 2009. Perspective: Trends and drivers of success in NPD practices: Results of the 2003 PDMA bestpractices study. Journal of Product Innovation Management 26 (1): 3–23. Belderbos, R., B. Leten, and S. Suzuki. 2013. How global is R&D? Firm- level determinants of home-country bias in R&D. Journal of Interna- tional Business Studies 44 (8): 765–86. Blossfeld, H. P., K. Golsch, and G. Rohwer. 2007. Event history analysis with Stata . Mahwah, NJ: Taylor & Francis. Brown, S., and K. Eisenhardt. 1995. Product development: Past research, present ﬁndings, and future directions. Academy of Management Review 20 (2): 343–78. Brusoni, S., A. Prencipe, and K. Pavitt. 2001. Knowledge specialization, organizational coupling, and the boundaries of the ﬁrm: Why do ﬁrmsknow more than they make? Administrative Science Quarterly 46 (4): 597–621. Bstieler, L., and M. Hemmert. 2010. Increasing learning and time efﬁciency in interorganizational new product development teams. Journal of
learning and time efﬁciency in interorganizational new product development teams. Journal of Product Innovation Management 27 (4): 485–99. Cankurtaran, P., F. Langerak, and A. Grifﬁn. 2013. Consequences of new product development speed: A meta-analysis. Journal of Product Inno- vation Management 30 (3): 465–86. Carbonell, P., and A. I. Rodriguez. 2006. Designing teams for speedy product development: The moderating effect of technological complex-ity.Journal of Business Research 59 (2): 225–32. Castellion, G., and S. K. Markham. 2013. Perspective: New product failure rates: Inﬂuence of argumentum ad populum and felf-interest. Journal of Product Innovation Management 30 (5): 976–79. Chen, J. Y ., F. Damanpour, and R. R. Reilly. 2010. Understanding anteced- ents of new product development speed: A meta-analysis. Journal of Operations Management 28 (1): 17–33. Chesbrough, H. 2003. Open innovation: The new imperative for creating and proﬁting from technology . Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. Chesbrough, H. 2006. Open business models: How to thrive in the new innovation landscape . Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. Chesbrough, H., W. Vanhaverbeke, and J. West, eds. 2006. Open innova- tion: Researching a new paradigm . Oxford: Oxford University Press. Chesbrough, H., W. Vanhaverbeke, and J. West, eds. 2014. New frontiers in open innovation . Oxford: Oxford University Press.Chidamber, S. R., and H. B. Kon. 1994. A research retrospective of inno- vation inception and success: The technology-push, demand-pull ques-tion. International Journal of Technology Management 9 (1): 94–112. Clift, T. B., and M. B. Vandenbosch. 1999. Project complexity and efforts to reduce product development cycle time. Journal of Business Research 45 (2): 187–98. Cockburn, I. M., and R. M. Henderson. 1998. Absorptive capacity, coau- thoring behavior, and the organization of research in drug discovery.The Journal of Industrial Economics 46 (2): 157–82. Cohen, W. M., R. R. Nelson,
in drug discovery.The Journal of Industrial Economics 46 (2): 157–82. Cohen, W. M., R. R. Nelson, and J. P. Walsh. 2000. Protecting their intellectual assets: Appropriability conditions and why US manufac-turing ﬁrms patent (or not) . Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Eco- nomic Research. Cooper, R. G. 2008. Perspective: The Stage-Gate® idea-to-launch process—Update, what’s new, and NexGen systems. Journal of Product Innovation Management 25 (3): 213–32. Cooper, R. G., and S. J. Edgett. 2009. Generating breakthrough new product ideas: Feeding the innovation funnel . Product Development Institute. Cooper, R. G., and S. J. Edgett. 2012. Best practices in the idea-to-launch process and its governance. Research Technology Management 55 (2): 43–54. Cooper, R. G., S. J. Edgett, and E. J. Kleinschmidt. 2004. Benchmarking best NPD practices. Research Technology Management 47 (3): 31–43. Cox, D. 1972. Regression models and life tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B (Methodological) 34 (2): 187–220. Danneels, E. 2002. The dynamics of product innovation and ﬁrm competences. Strategic Management Journal 23 (12): 1095–121. de Brentani, U., and S. E. Reid. 2012. The fuzzy front-end of discontinuous innovation: Insights for research and management. Journal of Product Innovation Management 29 (1): 70–87. Dougherty, D. 1992. Interpretative barriers to successful product innova- tion in large ﬁrms. Organization Science 3 (2): 179–202. Du, J., B. Leten, and W. Vanhaverbeke. 2014. Managing open innovation projects with science-based and market-based partners. Research Policy 43 (5): 828–40. Eling, K., F. Langerak, and A. Grifﬁn. 2013. A stage-wise approach to exploring performance effects of cycle time reduction. Journal of Product Innovation Management 30 (4): 626–41. Fabrizio, K. R. 2009. Absorptive capacity and the search for innovation. Research Policy 38 (2): 255–67. Faems, D., B. Van Looy, and K. Debackere. 2005. Interorganizational collaboration and
(2): 255–67. Faems, D., B. Van Looy, and K. Debackere. 2005. Interorganizational collaboration and innovation: Toward a portfolio approach. Journal of Product Innovation Management 22 (3): 238–50. Fleming, L., and O. Sorenson. 2004. Science as a map in technological search. Strategic Management Journal 25 (8–9): 909–28. Geanakoplos, J., and P. Milgrom. 1991. A theory of hierarchies based on limited managerial attention. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 5 (3): 205–25. Grant, R. M., and C. Baden-Fuller. 2004. A knowledge accessing theory of strategic alliances. Journal of Management Studies 41 (1): 61–84. Grifﬁn, A. 1993. Metrics for measuring product development cycle time. Journal of Product Innovation Management 10 (2): 112–25. Grifﬁn, A. 1997. The effect of project and process characteristics on product development cycle time. Journal of Marketing Research 34 (1): 24–35. Gulati, R. 1998. Alliances and networks. Strategic Management Journal 19 (4): 293–317. Hagedoorn, J. 1993. Understanding the rationale of strategic technology partnering: Inter-organizational modes of cooperation and sectoral dif-ferences. Strategic Management Journal 14 (5): 371–85. Hall, B. H., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg. 2005. Market value and patent citations. The Rand Journal of Economics 36 (1): 16–38.1196 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Hall, B. H., A. N. Link, and J. T. Scott. 2003. Universities as research partners. The Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (2): 485–91. Harhoff, D., and M. Reitzig. 2004. Determinants of opposition against EPO patent grants—The case of biotechnology and pharmaceuticals. Inter- national Journal of Industrial Organization 22 (4): 443–80. Harhoff, D., and S. Wagner. 2009. The duration of patent examination at the European patent ofﬁce. Management Science 55 (12): 1969–84. Harrison, D., and A. Waluszewski. 2008. The development of a user network as a way to re-launch an unwanted product. Research Policy 37 (1): 115–30. Henderson, R., and K. Clark. 1990. Architectural innovation: The reconﬁguration of existing product technologies and the failure ofestablished ﬁrms. Administrative Science Quarterly 35 (1): 9–30. Huber, F. 2012. On the role and interrelationship of spatial, social and cognitive proximity: Personal knowledge relationships of R&Dworkers in the Cambridge information technology cluster. Regional Studies 46 (9): 1169–82. Kahn, K. B., G. Castellion, and A. Grifﬁn. 2005. The PDMA handbook of new product development . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Kessler, E. H., and A. K. Chakrabarti. 1999. Speeding up the pace of new product development. Journal of Product Innovation Management 16 (3): 231–47. Knudsen, M., and T. Mortensen. 2011. Some immediate—but negative— effects of openness on product development performance.Technovation 31 (1): 54–64. Kogut, B., and U. Zander. 1993. Knowledge of the ﬁrm and the evolution- ary theory of the multinational corporation. Journal of International Business Studies 24 (4): 625–45. Kotabe, M. 1992. Global sourcing strategy: R&D, manufacturing, and marketing interfaces . Westport, CT: Quorum Books. Kultti, K., T. Takalo, and J. Toikka. 2007. Secrecy versus patenting. The Rand Journal of Economics 38 (1): 22–42. Langerak, F., and E. J. Hultink. 2006. The impact of product innovativeness on the link between development speed
and E. J. Hultink. 2006. The impact of product innovativeness on the link between development speed and new product proﬁtability.Journal of Product Innovation Management 23 (3): 203–14. Laursen, K., and A. Salter. 2006. Open for innovation: The role of openness in explaining innovation performance among UK manufacturing ﬁrms.Strategic Management Journal 27 (2): 131–50. Leten, B., W. Vanhaverbeke, N. Roijakkers, A. Clerix, and J. Van Helleputte. 2013. IP models to orchestrate innovation ecosystems:IMEC, a public research institute in nano-electronics. California Man- agement Review 55 (4): 51–64. Lorange, P., J. Roos, and P. S. Brønn. 1992. Building successful strategic alliances. Long Range Planning 25 (6): 10–17. Markham, S. K. 2013. The impact of front-end innovation activities on product performance. Journal of Product Innovation Management 30 (S1): 77–92. Mowery, D. C. 1998. The changing structure of the US national innovation system: Implications for international conﬂict on cooperation andR&D. Research Policy 27: 639–54.Narula, R., and J. Hagedoorn. 1999. Innovating through strategic alliances: Moving towards international partnerships and contractual agreements.Technovation 19 (5): 283–94. Nonaka, I. 1994. A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation. Organization Science 5 (1): 14–37. OECD. 2009. OECD patent statistics manual . Paris: OECD Publishing. Paul, S. M., D. S. Mytelka, C. T. Dunwiddie, C. C. Persinger, B. H. Munos, S. R. Lindborg, and A. L. Schacht. 2010. How to improve R&D pro-ductivity: The pharmaceutical industry’s grand challenge. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 9 (3): 203–14. Rosenberg, N. 1990. Why do ﬁrms do basic research (with their own money)? Research Policy 19 (2): 165–74. Rotemberg, J. J. 1991. A theory of inefﬁcient intraﬁrm transactions. The American Economic Review 81 (1): 191–209. Rothaermel, F. T., and D. L. Deeds. 2006. Alliance type, alliance experience and alliance management capability in high-technology
2006. Alliance type, alliance experience and alliance management capability in high-technology ventures.Journal of Business Venturing 21 (4): 429–60. Rycroft, R. W., and D. E. Kash. 1999. The complexity challenge: Techno- logical innovation for the 21st century . New York: Pinter. Schilling, M. A., and C. W. L. Hill. 1998. Managing the new product development process: Strategic imperatives. Academy of Management Executive 12 (3): 67–81. Schoonhoven, C. B., K. Eisenhardt, and K. Lyman. 1990. Speeding prod- ucts to market: Waiting time to ﬁrst product introduction in new ﬁrms.Administrative Science Quarterly 35 (1): 177–207. Swink, M., S. Talluri, and T. Pandejpong. 2006. Faster, better, cheaper: A study of NPD project efﬁciency and performance tradeoffs. Journal of Operations Management 24 (5): 542–62. Tao, J., and V . Magnotta. 2006. How air products and chemicals “identiﬁes and accelerates. Research Technology Management 49 (5): 12–8. Ulwick, A. W. 2002. Turn customer input into innovation. Harvard Busi- ness Review 80 (1): 91–97. Vanhaverbeke, W., J. Du, B. Leten, and F. Aalders. 2014. Exploring open innovation at the level of R&D projects. In New frontiers in open innovation , ed. H. Chesbrough, W. Vanhaverbeke, and J. West, 115–31. Oxford: Oxford University Press. von Hippel, E. 1986. Lead users: A source of novel product concepts. Management Science 32 (7): 791–805. von Hippel, E., and R. Katz. 2002. Shifting innovation to users via toolkits. Management Science 48 (7): 821–33. von Zedtwitz, M., and O. Gassmann. 2002. Market versus technology drive in R&D internationalization: Four different patterns of managingresearch and development. Research Policy 31 (4): 569–88. Woodruff, R. B. 1997. Customer value: The next source for competitive advantage. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 25 (2): 139– 53. Zander, U., and B. Kogut. 1995. Knowledge and the speed of the transfer and imitation of organizational capabilities: An empirical test. Organi- zation
of the transfer and imitation of organizational capabilities: An empirical test. Organi- zation Science 6 (1): 76–92.RESEARCH TRANSFER SPEED J PROD INNOV MANAG 1197 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Appendix A. Descriptive Statistics and Correlations (Cox Regressions: Monthly Records) Mean S.D. 1 2 3 456789 1. Market-based partners 0.608 0.488 1.000 2. Science-based partners 0.693 0.461 0.245 1.0003. Technological complexity (75 percentile) 0.219 0.414 −0.036 0.068 1.000 4. Sponsor department 0.582 0.493 −0.155 0.053 0.016 1.000 5. Number of patent applications 0.890 4.738 0.040 0.058 0.007 −0.042 1.000 6. Firm patent stock 5.771 2.120 0.026 −0.075 −0.145 −0.010 0.008 1.000 7. Project resources 1.892 0.595 0.243 0.282 0.034 0.020 0.230 0.017 1.0008. Project management formality 3.956 0.824 0.146 −0.016 0.001 −0.200 0.028 −0.013 0.068 1.000 9. # Projects under management 3.298 0.804 0.050 0.142 0.013 −0.036 0.013 −0.207 0.223 −0.053 1.000 (n=13,308). Appendix B. Descriptive Statistics and Correlations (Heckman Two-Step: Transferred Projects) Mean S.D. 1 2 3456 7 1. Total # of transfers 3.594 4.074 1.000 2. # Months to transfer 16.19 10.52 −0.215 1.000 3. Length of the project 44.95 20.01 0.297 0.311 1.0004. Project management formality 4.087 0.740 0.156 0.168 0.127 1.0005. Firm patent stock 6.260 1.934 0.162 −0.098 0.082 0.075 1.000 6. Project resources 1.451 0.392 0.154 −0.030 −0.087 0.125 0.078 1.000 7. # Projects under management 3.307 0.742 −0.235 0.210 −0.370 0.066 −0.167 0.130 1.000 (n=170).1198 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
When Research Meets Development: Antecedents and Implications of Transfer Speed Jingshu Du, Bart Leten, Wim Vanhaverbeke, and Henry Lopez-Vega This paper focuses on the organization of new product development in large, R&D-intensive ﬁrms. In these ﬁrms, research and development activities are often separated. Research is conducted in dedicated research projects atspecialized research labs. Once research results are achieved by research projects, they are transferred to businessunits for further development and commercialization. We investigate the speed whereby research projects transfer theirﬁrst research results to business units (hereafter: transfer speed ). In particular, we analyze the antecedents and performance implications of transfer speed. Based on data of 503 research projects from a European R&D intensivemanufacturing ﬁrm, our results suggest that a fast transfer speed (as measured by the time it takes for a research projectto develop and transfer its ﬁrst research result to business units) is associated with a better research performance (asmeasured by the total number of transfers the research project generates). Moreover, we ﬁnd that different types ofexternal R&D partners—science-based and market-based partners—play distinct roles in speeding up project ﬁrstresearch transfers. While market-based partnerships (i.e., customers and suppliers) generally contribute to a fastertransfer of ﬁrst research results, science-based partnerships (i.e., universities and research institutions) only speed upﬁrst research transfers of technologically very complex projects. Our results also show that early patent ﬁlings byresearch projects accelerate ﬁrst research transfers. Introduction New product development (NPD) is at the heart of companies’ survival and renewal in today’scompetitive industrial landscape. In many industries, new products account for more than 50% ofﬁrms’ annual sales (Schilling and Hill, 1998) and NPD isperceived as a key management imperative --- andcommercialization. In this transfer process, research proj-ects operate as a cost center and function as the internalsuppliers of the intermediate goods (research output) tobusiness units. Business units, by contrast, act as a proﬁtcenter and represent the internal buyers of the researchresults of research projects (Chesbrough, Vanhaverbeke,and West, 2006). Business units have limited budgets tospend, and the proﬁts they make on the market depend onthe business success of the research outputs they choose totransfer in from research projects. As a result, businessunits have to constantly screen the quality of researchoutputs of research projects and select the most promisingones (Chesbrough et al., 2006). The ability of businessunits to make the right transfer decisions—to evaluate andselect the most promising research projects (and the inter-mediate goods they provide) in the early research phase when little information is known—is essential. An important element in the intra-ﬁrm transfer process from research projects to business units is the speed of theﬁrst transfer. Fast ﬁrst transfers have a signaling functionand may increase the conﬁdence of business units in theresearch project. In the existing NPD literature, productdevelopment speed or NPD cycle time refers to theoverall cycle time and has been pointed to as one of themost critical factors in the success of new product devel-opment (e.g., Brown and Eisenhardt, 1995; Cankurtaranet al., 2013; Schilling and Hill, 1998). Numerous studieshave elaborated on the importance of NPD speed, as ithelps the ﬁrm to establish technology standards, jumpahead on the learning curve, respond rapidly to customerneeds, and enjoy more alternatives than slower innovators(Cankurtaran et al., 2013; Chen, Damanpour, and Reilly,2010; Langerak and Hultink, 2006). However, little isknown about the speed of intra-ﬁrm research transfers by which research results are transferred from research proj-ects to business units, and the link
ofﬁrms’ annual sales (Schilling and Hill, 1998) and NPD isperceived as a key management imperative (Cooper andEdgett, 2009). However, new product development ischallenging and suffers from high failure rates(Castellion and Markham, 2013). The highest attritionrate occurs in the pre-development (research) phase(Cooper and Edgett, 2009) which features great risks anduncertainties. For instance, in the pharmaceutical indus-try, more than half of the research projects fail (Paulet al., 2010). Despite the high fall-off rate in the researchphase, research activities strongly determine futureproduct success (Markham, 2013) and greatly differenti-ate winners from losers on the market (de Brentani andReid, 2012). Therefore, carefully managing the researchphase is of paramount importance to improving theoverall success of NPD activities.In large R&D-intensive companies, research efforts are often separated from development activities (vonZedtwitz and Gassmann, 2002). By centralizing researchin research labs, ﬁrms can beneﬁt from economies ofscale, reduce transaction costs associated with internalcoordination, and generate more impactful research ﬁnd-ings (Argyres and Silverman, 2004). Product develop-ment, on the other hand, is usually conducted by businessunits, creating new product offerings to satisfy speciﬁcmarket needs. Once a tangible research result is achievedin research labs, this result is transferred to businessunit(s) that are interested in its further development andcommercialization. As such, transfers symbolize success-ful research outcomes, and serve as the single mostimportant input for business units in their developmentand commercialization activities (Chesbrough, 2006).Only transferred research results have the chance to becommercialized and launched in the marketplace, whichmakes the transfer of research results from research todevelopment a crucial step for the overall success of newproduct development. Despite its importance, the transfer of research --- for the overall success of newproduct development. Despite its importance, the transfer of research results from research projects to business units remains a topicwhich has not yet received scholarly attention in the NPDliterature. While there are many aspects that relate toresearch transfers, this paper focuses on the speed whereby research projects transfer their ﬁrst research Address correspondence to: Jingshu Du, Vlerick Business School, Vlamingenstraat 83, 3000, Leuven, Flemish Brabant, Belgium. E-mail:jingshu.du@vlerick.com. Tel: +32488586449.J PROD INNOV MANAG 2014;31(6):1181–1198 © 2014 Product Development & Management AssociationDOI: 10. 1111/jpim.12249
results to business units (hereafter: transfer speed ). In the existing literature, speed (or “cycle time”) is pointed out asone of the most critical factors in the overall success ofnew product development (e.g., Cankurtaran, Langerak,and Grifﬁn, 2013), but the speed of intra-ﬁrm transfersfrom research projects to development units has not yetbeen studied (Vanhaverbeke, Du, Leten, and Aalders,2014). 1Moreover, as increasingly more companies and the projects within open up and collaborate withexternal partners (Chesbrough, 2003; Du, Leten, andVanhaverbeke, 2014), there is also a burning need in theopen innovation literature to examine the speed implica-tions of open innovation strategies on the NPD process.This paper investigates the antecedents and implicationsoftransfer speed . More speciﬁcally, it examines the effect of having a fast (or slow) ﬁrst transfer on the performanceof research projects, as well as the impact of (early) patent ﬁlings and two types of open innovationpartnerships—market-based and science-based R&Dpartnerships—on transfer speed, taking into account themoderating effect of the technological complexity of theresearch project. To investigate the antecedents and performance impli- cations of transfer speed, we rely on a unique dataset of503 research projects from a large European R&D–intensive manufacturing ﬁrm. This ﬁrm has an annualR&D budget above one billion euros during the entireobservation period (2003–2010) and its activities span avariety of industries. Our ﬁndings show that researchprojects that generate fast ﬁrst transfers are associatedwith a better research performance. Fast transfers enableresearch projects to collect early feedback from businessunits and help them to secure further research funding bysending a positive signal to the project sponsors andincrease their conﬁdence about the research project.Moreover, we ﬁnd that while market-based partnershipsspeed up research transfers in general, science-basedpartnerships are only
market-based partnershipsspeed up research transfers in general, science-basedpartnerships are only linked to the acceleration ofresearch transfers of technologically (very) complex proj-ects. Finally, research projects that apply for patents earlyon in the research process are more likely to generate fastﬁrst transfers to business units. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: the next section provides the theoretical background. Thesubsequent section presents the hypotheses, which is fol-lowed by a description of the data and research methods.The paper concludes with a discussion of the theoreticaland empirical implications, as well as the limitations andavenues for further research. Theoretical Background A theory that underlies the mechanism of transfers andtransfer speed from research projects to business units istheintra-ﬁrm transaction theory (Rotemberg, 1991). In intra-ﬁrm transactions, intermediate goods are producedand transferred between agents of the same ﬁrm (Kotabe,1992). In the intra-ﬁrm transfer process, it is often difﬁ-cult for the “buyer” agent to assess upfront the quality ofthe intermediate goods (potentially) transferred from the“supplier” unit, particularly when the goods are still intheir early phase of development, which is characterizedby great technological and market uncertainty. An impor-tant indicator for the “buyer” to signal the quality of theintermediate goods is the time or speed by which the intermediate goods are delivered (Rotemberg, 1991). Generally, delivery time can be inﬂuenced by two factors:1Transfer speed is different from the concept “fuzzy front end cycle time” (e.g., in Eling, Langerak, and Grifﬁn, 2013), with the latter referringto the time it takes a project to complete the fuzzy front end activities suchas opportunity identiﬁcation, idea generation and screening, concept devel-opment, and project planning. BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES Dr. Jingshu Du is research fellow at Vlerick Business School and Hasselt
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES Dr. Jingshu Du is research fellow at Vlerick Business School and Hasselt University, both located in Belgium. She received her Ph.D in applied economics from Hasselt University. Her current research inter-ests focus on open and collaborative innovation, business model inno-vation, and IP strategies in multinational ﬁrms. Dr. Bart Leten is associate professor of innovation management at the Vlerick Business School (Belgium) and assistant professor of manage- rial economics, strategy and innovation at the KU Leuven (Belgium). Hereceived a Ph.D. in applied economics from the KU Leuven. Hisresearch focuses on open innovation and intellectual property strategiesof multinational ﬁrms. Dr. Wim Vanhaverbeke is professor at the University of Hasselt. He is also visiting professor at ESADE Business School and the National university of Singapore. He has published in several international jour-nals such as Organization Science ,Research Policy ,California Man- agement Review ,Journal of Management Studies ,Small Business Economics ,Journal of Business Venturing , and Technovation .H ew a s co-editor with Henry Chesbrough and Joel West of the books Open Innovation: Researching a New Paradigm (OUP, 2006) and New Fron- tiers in Open Innovation (OUP, 2014). His current research is focusing on open innovation in SMEs, innovation ecosystems, and the implemen-tation of open innovation practices. He was recognized by IAMOT asone of the top 50 authors of technology and innovation management forthe period 2008–2012. Dr. Henry Lopez-Vega is a post-doctoral researcher in the department of management and engineering (IEI–FEK) at Linköping University, Sweden. He has a MSc and a Ph.D. from ESADE Business School,Spain. His research contributes to the burgeoning discussions on theimplementation of open innovation at MNCs and role of foreign sub-sidiaries in BRICS economies.1182 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from --- in drug discovery.The Journal of Industrial Economics 46 (2): 157–82. Cohen, W. M., R. R. Nelson, and J. P. Walsh. 2000. Protecting their intellectual assets: Appropriability conditions and why US manufac-turing ﬁrms patent (or not) . Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Eco- nomic Research. Cooper, R. G. 2008. Perspective: The Stage-Gate® idea-to-launch process—Update, what’s new, and NexGen systems. Journal of Product Innovation Management 25 (3): 213–32. Cooper, R. G., and S. J. Edgett. 2009. Generating breakthrough new product ideas: Feeding the innovation funnel . Product Development Institute. Cooper, R. G., and S. J. Edgett. 2012. Best practices in the idea-to-launch process and its governance. Research Technology Management 55 (2): 43–54. Cooper, R. G., S. J. Edgett, and E. J. Kleinschmidt. 2004. Benchmarking best NPD practices. Research Technology Management 47 (3): 31–43. Cox, D. 1972. Regression models and life tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B (Methodological) 34 (2): 187–220. Danneels, E. 2002. The dynamics of product innovation and ﬁrm competences. Strategic Management Journal 23 (12): 1095–121. de Brentani, U., and S. E. Reid. 2012. The fuzzy front-end of discontinuous innovation: Insights for research and management. Journal of Product Innovation Management 29 (1): 70–87. Dougherty, D. 1992. Interpretative barriers to successful product innova- tion in large ﬁrms. Organization Science 3 (2): 179–202. Du, J., B. Leten, and W. Vanhaverbeke. 2014. Managing open innovation projects with science-based and market-based partners. Research Policy 43 (5): 828–40. Eling, K., F. Langerak, and A. Grifﬁn. 2013. A stage-wise approach to exploring performance effects of cycle time reduction. Journal of Product Innovation Management 30 (4): 626–41. Fabrizio, K. R. 2009. Absorptive capacity and the search for innovation. Research Policy 38 (2): 255–67. Faems, D., B. Van Looy, and K. Debackere. 2005. Interorganizational collaboration and
J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License --- by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
First, the supplier’s choice of delivery. For instance, the supplier of intermediate goods may act cautiously andwait purposively until the goods are perfected beforetransferring them to the buyer agent. Second, the supplieris genuinely incompetent to deliver high-quality goods intime (Allen and Faulhaber, 1988; Rotemberg, 1991).When the delivery of intermediate goods takes a longtime, it is hard for an interested buyer to ascertain whichof the two aforementioned situations (e.g., prudence orincompetence) holds true (Rotemberg, 1991). Fearing thesecond possibility, the potential buyer may decide not toaccept the intermediate good when it takes a long time fora supplier to deliver that good (Rotemberg, 1991). Itfollows that a competent supplier needs to show its com-petence early on to potential buyers in order to rule out aperception of being incompetent in the eyes of the poten-tial buyer. In other words, if the supplier is sound andcapable of delivering high-quality goods, the time framein which he or she delivers these goods ( transfer speed ) can be of particular importance to the success of itstransfers. In large, R&D-intensive ﬁrms, pre-development (research) and development activities are often con-ducted in different organizational units (von Zedtwitzand Gassmann, 2002). Research projects are typicallyconducted in research laboratories to beneﬁt from econo-mies of scale and scope, as well as reduced transactioncosts (Argyres and Silverman, 2004; Belderbos, Leten,and Suzuki, 2013), while the subsequent development ofthese projects usually takes place in business units thathave a better understanding of market needs and canbuild on their experience to launch new products. Research projects produce research results—usually in the form of intermediate goods (e.g., prototypes,algorithms, models)—and transfer these intermediategoods to business units for further development andcommercialization. In this transfer process, research proj-ects operate as a cost center
by which research results are transferred from research proj-ects to business units, and the link to the performance ofresearch projects. In the intra-ﬁrm research transfer process, research projects can adopt different strategies which may inﬂu-ence the transfer speed of their research results. Onestrategy is to open up and collaborate with external part-ners (Chesbrough, 2003; Grant and Baden-Fuller, 2004;Hagedoorn, 1993). The open innovation literature distin-guishes between two important types of external R&Dpartnerships: science-based and market-based partner-ships (Danneels, 2002; Du et al., 2014; Faems, Van Looy,and Debackere, 2005). Science-based partnershipsfeature collaborations with partners that have deep scien-tiﬁc knowledge, such as universities and research insti-tutes. These partnerships provide research projects accessto scientiﬁc knowledge (Cockburn and Henderson, 1998;Fabrizio, 2009). Market-based partnerships, on the otherhand, consist of players with a close link to the market,such as suppliers and customers (Danneels, 2002; Faemset al., 2005). Relationships with market-based playersprovide research projects with the latest technologies thatare available on the market and ﬁrst-hand informationabout the market needs (von Hippel and Katz, 2002).Access to external knowledge may be particularlyimportant for research projects that are conducted in“complex” technology ﬁelds where the new product con-sists of multiple components (Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh,2000; Harhoff and Reitzig, 2004) and in-house knowl-edge on some components is likely to be missing. Asecond strategy research projects may take to attractinterested business units is to ﬁle (early on) for patent RESEARCH TRANSFER SPEED J PROD INNOV MANAG 1183 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions
protection of their research results. Research projects with early patent ﬁlings are attractive to business unitssince research ﬁndings are (partly) codiﬁed and, ifgranted, patents offer exclusive monopoly rights for theproducts that are introduced to the market (Arora andCeccagnoli, 2006; Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg, 2005). Hypotheses In this section, we develop hypotheses on the antecedentsand performance implications of transfer speed. We ﬁrstinvestigate the relationship between transfer speed andthe performance of research projects (H1). Next, weexamine three potentially inﬂuential factors of transferspeed: market-based partnerships (H2) and science-basedpartnerships (H3)—with the moderating effect of techno-logical complexity (H4), as well as early patent applica-tions (H5). Figure 1 provides a schematic overview of theresearch framework. Transfer Speed and the Performance of Research Projects The speed at which a research project transfers its ﬁrst research result to business units (transfer speed) can be animportant driver of the success of the research project, forthe following three reasons: First, a fast transfer speed may help to increase the conﬁdence of the sponsor about the ongoing research itsponsors. Research is characterized by high risks andgreat uncertainties. As a result, many research projectsfail to reach satisfying research outcomes. These“hanging” projects consume valuable resources. There-fore, the strategy “to detect and kill the failing projectsearly in the NPD process” (Cooper, 2008) is oftentimesput forward as a golden rule—which prompts for theefﬁcient use of valuable resources and cost savings, byunplugging less promising projects early on and redirect-ing resources to the more promising ones. Financial spon- sors of research projects (often business units) thereforehave to constantly screen the progress of their projectportfolio, and stop the further ﬁnancing of under-performing research projects. Research projects thatmanage to --- innovations, which isreferred to as the patent premium (Arora, Ceccagnoli, andCohen, 2008; Hall et al., 2005). Research projects whichhave already ﬁled for patent applications may be consid-ered as more attractive to business units and the earlyﬁlings of patents may therefore lead to faster ﬁrstresearch transfers. Second, research results are a combination of both tacit and codiﬁed knowledge (Kogut and Zander, 1993;Nonaka, 1994). To further develop and commercializeresearch results, the recipient business unit has to under-stand the transferred technologies. While codiﬁed knowl-edge can be easily transferred from one unit to another,tacit knowledge prevents efﬁcient sharing between differ- ent units (Almeida, Song, and Grant, 2002; Grant andBaden-Fuller, 2004), especially when these units are ofdistinct nature and are featured with a large cognitivedistance (Huber, 2012). This is particularly true forknowledge transfers from research projects to businessunits. When a research project ﬁles for patents, it engagesin efforts to (at least partly) codify tacit research resultsby providing detailed descriptions of the functions andmechanisms of the underlying technologies in the patentapplication ﬁle. These detailed descriptions, in turn, mayhelp the potential recipient business unit to better under-stand the transferred research results. Hence, early patentapplications are expected to lead to faster ﬁrst researchtransfers. This leads to the following hypothesis: H5: Early patent ﬁlings enable research projects to speed up the transfer of ﬁrst research results. Methodology Sample and Data Collection Detailed information on research projects from one large European R&D-intensive manufacturing ﬁrm is used inthis study. The sample ﬁrm invests heavily in R&D, withan annual R&D budget of more than one billion eurosconsecutively during all the sample years (2003–2010).There are several reasons as to why a single ﬁrm ischosen as the sample in this paper: First, in multiple
stop the further ﬁnancing of under-performing research projects. Research projects thatmanage to quickly generate and transfer their ﬁrstresearch results give a strong signal to their sponsors andincrease their conﬁdence in the research projects they aresponsoring, which, in turn, may help the research projectsto secure further ﬁnancing, instead of being ﬁltered outearly in the research process. Second, fast ﬁrst transfers enable research projects to collect early feedback from recipient business units.Early feedback may serve as valuable input for theongoing research of the research projects and may helpthem to improve the quality of their work (von Hippel,1986). Third, research projects that have fast ﬁrstresearch transfers allow the recipient business units toseek a sharp product deﬁnition (Cooper and Edgett, 2012;Cooper, Edgett, and Kleinschmidt, 2004) and to learnbeforehand about the value creation possibilities of thetechnologies under research (Chesbrough, 2003). Fastﬁrst transfers may therefore help to increase the attrac-tiveness of the research results to potential recipient busi-ness units. In sum, we hypothesize that: H1: Research projects with a fast transfer of ﬁrst research results are linked to a better researchperformance. Market-Based Partnerships and Transfer Speed Market-based partnerships consist of players with a close link to the market, such as suppliers and customers(Danneels, 2002; Du et al., 2014; Faems et al., 2005).Market-based partners can help research projects to speedup the transfer of their ﬁrst research results, because ofthe following reasons: First, in research projects, deﬁning and clarifying a speciﬁc research question as well as setting clear-cutresearch goals (Grifﬁn, 1993) may take considerable timeif the project team is working on its own without a clearview on what the market wants. When partnering withmarket-based partners, the project team gets equippedwith up-to-date market information and timely adjust-ments of such
the project team gets equippedwith up-to-date market information and timely adjust-ments of such information (Ulwick, 2002; Woodruff,1997), which may enable the project team to detect andrespond faster to market needs, and thus, speed up thedevelopment and transfer of their ﬁrst research result tobusiness units. Second, market-based partners, and particularly lead customers, tend to be concerned with the timely execu- Market-based  Partnerships   Science-based  Partnerships  Project   Transfer Speed Project Research  PerformanceH 1 H 3 H 4H 2  Technology  Complexity   Patent  Application H 5 Figure 1. Conceptual Model1184 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
tion of research projects, as this helps to better serve their own needs (von Hippel, 1986). Such market-pull factors(Chidamber and Kon, 1994) may give additional momen-tum to the research team to speed up the development andtransfer of their ﬁrst research result to business units.Research projects that are conducted in collaborationwith market-based partners may also appear more appeal-ing to potential recipient business units, as these projectsare geared towards solving an (unmet) market need whichis veriﬁed by the market-based partners. Third, market-based partners provide market insights to the research project which enable early testing and fastfailing in the research process. As a result, possibilities ofrework and mistakes are reduced. A large portion of pro-longed research activities in the NPD process stem fromrework and mistakes (Kahn, Castellion, and Grifﬁn,2005). Market insights point out ways for improvementand adjustment before substantial rework is needed(Harrison and Waluszewski, 2008), and therefore mayreduce the time needed to develop and transfer ﬁrstresearch results. Taken together, we hypothesize: H2: Market-based partnerships enable research projects to speed up the transfer of ﬁrst research results. Science-Based Partnerships and Transfer Speed Next to market-based partners, research projects may also involve science-based partners (i.e., universities andresearch institutions) in their research process (Du et al.,2014; Rosenberg, 1990). Science-based partnerships mayenable research projects to speed up their ﬁrst researchtransfers, because of the following reasons: First, science-based partners bring the research project speciﬁc resources and scientiﬁc knowledge, which mayhelp to ﬁll in the research gaps the project is facing.Research projects may experience delays in executionjust because the key elements for the desired solution aremissing in-house. As research becomes increasinglycomplex and multi-disciplinary (Brusoni, Prencipe, andPavitt,
As research becomes increasinglycomplex and multi-disciplinary (Brusoni, Prencipe, andPavitt, 2001; Rycroft and Kash, 1999), it is likely thatﬁrms do not possess all the necessary capacities in-house(Narula and Hagedoorn, 1999). Slow innovators “rein-vent the wheel,” instead of actively building on knowl-edge that already exists (Chesbrough, 2003; Tao andMagnotta, 2006). On the contrary, science-based partner-ships may help research projects to speed up researchtransfers by leveraging ready-to-use knowledge and tech-nology from experienced scientiﬁc partners (Grant andBaden-Fuller, 2004). Second, collaborating with science-based partners may enable research projects to beneﬁt from a “divisionof labor,” i.e., the partitioning of research tasks among partners. Conducting research in parallel on differenttasks may reduce the time to generate transferableresearch outcomes. Constrained by resource limitations(Barczak, Grifﬁn, and Kahn, 2009; Grifﬁn, 1997), it maybe challenging for research projects to simultaneouslywork on all research tasks. By collaborating with science-based partners, the project team may leverage theresources and expertise of its partners by working inparallel with them, which may shorten the time needed inresearch. Consequently, science-based partners may helpto accelerate the ﬁrst transfer of research outcomes. Third, science-based partners who possess profound scientiﬁc knowledge may quickly spot ﬂaws in theresearch process and solve technical problems thatresearch projects are facing, which may contribute totransfer speed acceleration. Moreover, science-basedpartners can provide research projects with access toadvanced scientiﬁc equipment and research facilities (Duet al., 2014; Leten, Vanhaverbeke, Roijakkers, Clerix,and Van Helleputte, 2013), which may also accelerate thegeneration and transfer of research outcomes. Takentogether, we hypothesize: H3: Science-based partnerships enable research projects to speed up the transfer of ﬁrst research --- partners are well positioned to develop a“helicopter view” on complex technologies that consistof multiple components in complex product architectures(Fleming and Sorenson, 2004; Rosenberg, 1990). Thisenables them to sort out the intricate relations betweentechnology components and to speed up the developmentof transferable research outcomes. In general, the situatedeffect of science-based partnerships should be interpretedwith caution. It might be that, although science-basedpartners do not (universally) accelerate research transfers,the research results of projects they are involved in aremore innovative and/or of greater impact. In other words,the beneﬁts of science-based partners might be material-ized in a different way, i.e., via more impactful innova-tions or higher ﬁnancial returns (e.g., Du et al., 2014).In addition, we found that projects that share their project leader with multiple other projects generate fasterresearch transfers. This seemingly unexpected result maybe interpreted as follows: the variable “number of proj-ects managed” may signal the attention each researchproject gets from its manager; but at the same time, it mayalso signal the scope of the research project, and thepossible cross-fertilization across different projects theproject leader is managing. On the contrary, the projectswhich are managed by one (dedicated) project manager,although getting the most managerial attention (as theyare handled by project managers who have limitednumber of projects at hand), may take longer to transfertheir ﬁrst research results. Theoretical Implications This paper contributes to the NPD literature, in particularthe research on NPD cycle time, in several ways. First, weintroduce a new concept of speed—the speed of intra-ﬁrm research transfers from research projects to businessunits. Prior research on cycle time predominantly took amonolithic view on cycle time by studying the speed ofthe entire NPD process from ideation all the way down toproduct
H3: Science-based partnerships enable research projects to speed up the transfer of ﬁrst research results. R&D Partnerships and Technological Complexity Because of the distinctive nature of research projects, adopting a universal approach in all projects might not beeffective (Clift and Vandenbosch, 1999; Kessler andChakrabarti, 1999). One important dimension of differ-entiation is the technological complexity of research proj-ects. Cohen et al. (2000) distinguish between “complex”and “discrete” technologies. The key difference betweenboth types of technologies is whether the inventions are,respectively, comprised of multiple or relatively few pat-entable elements (Cohen et al., 2000). Research projects in complex technology ﬁelds focus on inventions with multiple functionalities (Grifﬁn,1997), and for which the overall understanding of all theencompassing components is typically low (Carbonelland Rodriguez, 2006). Research projects in complextechnology ﬁelds are expected to beneﬁt more from R&Dpartnerships. In complex technology ﬁelds, because newproducts typically consist of a large number of compo-nents, it is likely that knowledge on some components islacking in the ﬁrm. External R&D partnerships mayprovide research project teams in complex ﬁelds withknowledge on these speciﬁc component(s) that is unavail-able internally. Further, external R&D partners may alsoRESEARCH TRANSFER SPEED J PROD INNOV MANAG 1185 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
equip research projects with a better overall understand- ing of the technological and market space in which theysearch for solutions for the problems they are addressing(Carbonell and Rodriguez, 2006; Grifﬁn, 1997). As aresult, research projects in complex technological ﬁeldsmay beneﬁt more from external R&D partnerships inspeeding up research transfers. Moreover, in complex technology ﬁelds, multiple components interact with each other in determining thefunctionality of new products (Henderson and Clark,1990). Any single mistake or misﬁt of one technologycomponent may affect the functions of the overallproduct, resulting in unnecessary delays in product devel-opment. Collaborating with external partners helps theresearch project to access multi-disciplinary scientiﬁcand market knowledge, and to develop a “helicopterview” on different components and their interfaces in theknowledge architecture (Henderson and Clark, 1990). Asa result, it may speed up the development of (ﬁrst) trans-ferable research outcomes. In sum, we hypothesize: H4: Science-based and market-based partnerships have a larger effect on the speed of ﬁrst transfers of techno-logically complex projects. Patent Filings and Transfer Speed Besides engaging in R&D partnerships, another impor- tant decision a research project makes is whether andwhen to ﬁle for patents to legally protect its researchoutcomes. Early patent ﬁlings may accelerate the speedof ﬁrst research transfers, for the following reasons: First, research projects that apply for patents on their technologies may—if the patents get granted—improve the possibilities of the recipient business unit toappropriate economic value from the transferred tech-nologies, by offering them temporary monopoly rights onthe use of the technologies (Arora and Ceccagnoli, 2006;Kultti, Takalo, and Toikka, 2007). Patent protectionincreases the economic value of innovations, which isreferred to as the patent premium (Arora, Ceccagnoli, andCohen, 2008; Hall et
are several reasons as to why a single ﬁrm ischosen as the sample in this paper: First, in multiple ﬁrmstudies, each of the ﬁrms may develop (slightly) differentunderstanding of the research phase, transfer speed, andresearch performance. Given these differences, combin-ing various data sources to form a uniﬁed multi-ﬁrmdataset is not only challenging but may also engender lessaccurate results. Second, as the primary focus is on intra-ﬁrm transfers of intermediate goods (research outputs), asingle ﬁrm study enables us to better focus on the majorvariables of interest, ﬁltering out possible confoundingeffects at the “macro level” (e.g., ﬁrm level), such asinnovation policy and corporate culture. Third, a singleﬁrm study also allows us to dig deeper into the ﬁrm andget ﬁne-grained data, making it possible to collect data ona large set of control variables at the project level. Our dataset contains detailed information on 503 research projects that were initiated and executed in thedifferent research labs of the company during the 2003–2010 period. 2Instead of relying on subjective and retro- spective evaluations of managers, this study relies on 2The same data structure has been adopted in prior research (Du et al., 2014).1186 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
objective information that is collected from the internal databases of the sample ﬁrm, containing information onproject stafﬁng, project management and research out-comes (i.e., research transfers). Our dataset includes bothdata on successful and failed research projects (i.e., proj-ects that did not proceed on to the next stage of develop-ment). These research projects span many differenttechnological ﬁelds, covering all eight main InternationalPatent Classiﬁcation (IPC) 3technology ﬁelds (one-digit level) and 44 more detailed IPC technology ﬁelds (three-digit level). The ﬁve top-ranked technological ﬁelds inour sample of projects are: G06 (computing, calculating,and counting), A61 (medical science), H04 (electric com-munication), G01 (measuring and testing), and H01(basic electrical elements). The starting date and ending date (in case projects are ended before 2010) of each research project is recorded.A research project can end either because it achieved itsresearch goal, or simply because the sponsor decides toterminate it. During the execution of a research project,research results can be achieved at any point in time. Ifperceived as valuable by business units, these researchresults are transferred to interested business units who arewilling to commit resources (i.e., time, money, people) tofurther develop and commercialize them into new prod-ucts and services. As a result, a research project maygenerate multiple research transfers during its lifetime. Aresearch transfer implies that a research result is takenover by a business unit, and for which there is docu-mented evidence of its intended use by this recipient.More speciﬁcally, a “transfer” has to fulﬁll the followingcriteria:  A transfer involves a written transfer plan agreed between the research project and the business unit.  A transfer coincides with a wrap-up of activity in the business unit that aims to utilize the knowledge beingtransferred from the research project.  A transfer must conclude --- in the performanceequation, using data of the subset of 170 research projects.BU 1 BU 2  Start EndTransfer 1 Transfer 2  Transfer 3   Patent  Application 1  Patent  Application 2   Legend:  BU — Business Unit Research (R)Development (D)   Figure 2. Transfer Flow and Research Flow of a Research Project1188 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
to utilize the knowledge beingtransferred from the research project.  A transfer must conclude with an agreement from the receiving business unit that the transfer has taken placeand that the transfer is complete. While there are differences across transfers in the type of research outcomes that are transferred (prototypes,algorithms, models, etc.), the above-mentioned criteriaensure that transfers are comparable and can be used asan indicator of the performance of research projects. Thiswas conﬁrmed in interviews with managers of our sample company, as it uses the number of transfers as key per-formance indicators of research projects. Research projects are initiated by either one of the Business Units of the ﬁrm, or by Corporate Research . Business Units earn their proﬁts from product sales, andmainly sponsor research that is geared towards clearmarket needs. Corporate Research is the unit of the ﬁrmthat manages the research labs. It has an annual R&Dbudget to sponsor research projects that are of strategicimportance to the ﬁrm, and which are more generalpurpose in nature (e.g., platform technologies which donot cater to the speciﬁc needs of any business unit). Abouthalf of the research projects are sponsored by BusinessUnits, and the rest are sponsored by Corporate Research. There are various types of business units within the ﬁrm that act as recipients of research transfers. Mostbusiness units are organized around speciﬁc productgroups. Besides the main business units that deal withthe core business of the ﬁrm, the New Business Devel-opment (NBD) department explores the internal use oftechnologies that fall outside the scope of the ﬁrm’sexisting business ﬁelds. The Incubator department incu-bates early-stage technologies that have the potential togrow into a new business later on. The businessdepartments—IP & Standards and Licensing—deal withexternal third parties and are responsible for licensing outor selling technologies that result from research --- parties and are responsible for licensing outor selling technologies that result from research projectsfor which there is no direct interest of the internal busi-ness units in commercializing them. Business units that have received research transfers are often the sponsors of the transferring research projects,but other business units can also ask for transfer(s) ofresearch results, if perceived as valuable to their business.We have illustrated the transfer process for one hypotheti-cal research project in Figure 2. This research project wasinitiated by Business Unit 1 and has generated threeresearch transfers. The ﬁrst two transfers were requestedby Business Unit 1 (the sponsor) while the third transferwas transferred to Business Unit 2. This project also ﬁledfor two patents, one preceding the ﬁrst research transfer,and one between the ﬁrst and the second researchtransfer. Methodology We have conducted two different types of empiricalanalyses: Transfer speed and project research performance. To investigate the relationship between the speed of3IPC is a hierarchical technology classiﬁcation that follows a tiered structure to classify inventions into technology ﬁelds. At the most detailedlevel (represented by an eight-digit code), IPC differentiates between70,000 technologies. These technologies are aggregated into subclasses(four-digit code), classes (three-digit code), and sections (one-digit code).RESEARCH TRANSFER SPEED J PROD INNOV MANAG 1187 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License --- of the transfer and imitation of organizational capabilities: An empirical test. Organi- zation Science 6 (1): 76–92.RESEARCH TRANSFER SPEED J PROD INNOV MANAG 1197 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
a ﬁrst research transfer and project research performance, we used the Heckman two-step selection model. Sincetransfer speed can only be measured for research projectsthat generated at least one transfer, the performanceanalysis is limited to the subset of projects ( n=170) which have research transfer(s). The remainingun-transferred projects—which may also have the poten-tial to generate a transfer but are however not observed inour sample—are left out. To control for selection effectsdue to the nonrandom nature of the subset of projectswith transfers, the Heckman two-step selection model isemployed in the study. We ﬁrst estimated the probability that research pro- jects generated at least one research transfer—and forwhom transfer speed could be calculated—using data onthe full sample of 503 projects. We used the dummyvariable “sponsor department” as selection variable. Thisvariable takes the value 1 if a research project was spon-sored by Corporate Research, and the value 0 when oneof the ﬁrm’s Business Units sponsored the research. Weexpect that, compared to research projects that are spon-sored by Corporate Research, research projects that aresponsored by Business Units are more likely to generatea research transfer. This is because Business Unit spon-sors focus on technologies that are directly related to theirbusiness needs; therefore, technologies that are spon-sored by them are more likely to be transferred to them(i.e., the sponsor of the project) to ﬁll in their needs. Thisis not the case for projects sponsored by CorporateResearch, as they focus more on technologies that aregeneral purpose in nature, and which are not directlylinked to the needs of one speciﬁc business unit.However, despite the expected higher likelihood for Busi-ness Unit sponsored projects to generate one researchtransfer, there are no clear theoretical reasons to expectsystematic differences in the overall performance (mea-sured by the total number of transfers) of research proj- ects --- concurrently in a certain year as proxy for the managerial attention of each individual project. Sponsor department. In our data, research projects can be initiated by two types of sponsor units, i.e.,Corporate Research (51% of sample projects), or any of theBusiness Units of the ﬁrm (49% of sample proj- ects). 8The variable sponsor department is a dummy variable, taking the variable 1 if a project is initiated byCorporate Research, and 0 otherwise. As explained indetail in the Methodology section, this variable alsofunctions as the selection variable in the two-stepHeckman estimations. Project initiating year. Project initiating year refers to the year in which a research project started. This variablemay signal the macroeconomic situations at a particularpoint in time, but it may also absorb the effects of changesin corporate level strategy. We include a range of dummyvariables to control for project initiating years. Table 1 gives a brief description of the variables we used in this study. Appendix A and Appendix B showthe descriptive statistics and correlations for the depen-dent and explanatory variables in the event historyanalysis and in the Heckman two-step estimations,respectively.Empirical Results Transfer Speed and the Performance of Research Projects We ﬁrst analyze the relationship between transfer speed and the performance of research projects.9Table 2 reports the results of the Heckman two-step regression model.Model 1 shows the selection result for the ﬁrst step:whether a project generates a transfer or not. It includesthe control variables and the selection variable (SponsorDepartment). As expected, the coefﬁcient of the selectionvariable is negative and signiﬁcant, conﬁrming thatresearch sponsored by Corporate Research has a lowerprobability to generate research transfer(s). Projects thathave more resources and that can build on a large ﬁrm-level patent stock have a higher probability to generate aresearch transfer. The results further show that
in the overall performance (mea-sured by the total number of transfers) of research proj- ects that have different types of corporate sponsors. 4As a result, the variable “Sponsor department” qualiﬁes as aselection variable. In the second step, we estimated therelationship between transfer speed and research projectperformance for the subset of 170 research projects, con-trolling for the possible selection effects by including theinverse Mills ratio from the selection equation in the ﬁrststep. Data on project transfers is used to measure the per- formance of research projects. A transfer signals the com-mitment of the recipient business unit and its willingnessto invest (time, money, people) in further developing andcommercializing the research output. Hence, transferscan be considered as positive evaluation by business unitsof the value creation potential of the speciﬁc researchoutput generated by the research project. In this way,project research transfers serve as a valuable indicator ofproject research performance. The larger the number ofresearch transfers the research project delivers to businessunits, the better the (perceived) performance of theresearch project. To control for the skewed nature of thisvariable, we used the logarithmic transformation of thenumber of research transfers as our dependent variable. Antecedents of transfer speed. To explore factors that may affect the (ﬁrst) transfer speed of research projects,we used event history analysis, also known as survivalanalysis. Event history analysis has been frequently usedin prior studies where “speed” or “time” was the focalvariable of interest (e.g., Schoonhoven, Eisenhardt, andLyman, 1990; Zander and Kogut, 1995). Event historyanalysis has several advantages in time-related studies: 4We have empirically tested this assumption. The dummy variable “sponsor department” is insigniﬁcant when included in the performanceequation, using data of the subset of 170 research projects.BU 1 BU 2  Start
First, it takes into account both the occurrence and the timing of an event while estimating the effects ofexplanatory variable. Second, it takes care of right-handcensoring problems. The dependent variable measures how fast a research project generates a ﬁrst transfer (the hazard that a projectreaches an event—a transfer). We opted for the Cox pro-portional hazard model (Cox, 1972) in this set of analy-ses, since this model requires no upfront assumptionconcerning the distribution of the hazard rate of projecttransfers. The Cox model allows the baseline hazard to beﬁtted from the data. The Cox model speciﬁes the hazardthat a project delivers a research transfer as the product ofa baseline hazard h(t) and a project-speciﬁc hazard, withthe latter modeled as an exponential function of themodel parameters β xand regressors x ij: ht | x ht x ij ij x( ) ( ).exp( . ) = β To control for possible unobserved project-speciﬁc effects such as differences in project tasks, managementstyles, and team capabilities, we augmented the Coxmodel with a stochastic project-level component α i (Blossfeld, Golsch, and Rohwer, 2007). This project- level component, or shared frailty term, enters the hazardfunction in a multiplicative manner and has a mean of 1and a variance of θ. As we have detailed information about the start and transfer date of each transfer, weperformed our analysis at the monthly level. We alsospeciﬁed the exit time of those projects that were endedbefore the end of our observation window. Variables Transfer speed. In the Heckman selection model, we measure transfer speed as the time from the start of aresearch project to its ﬁrst transfer of research results. Inline with our dependent variable in the Cox proportionalhazard model this variable is detailed at the monthlylevel. By the end of our observation period in 2010, 170of the 503 research projects generated research transfers.The remaining research projects were either still ongoingor ended without generating any
transfers.The remaining research projects were either still ongoingor ended without generating any research transfer. Theaverage speed of ﬁrst research transfers for the 170 trans-ferring projects is 1.35 years. Science-based and market-based partnerships. We have annual information on the involvement of externalpartners in research projects. More speciﬁcally, weknow—for each project and year—whether it collabo-rated with science-based (i.e., universities and researchinstitutions) and/or market-based partners (i.e., customers and suppliers). Science-based and market-based partner-ships are both binary variables that take a value “1” ifcollaboration with the speciﬁc type of partners took placein the research project up to the observation year, and “0”otherwise. In our sample of 503 projects, 286 projects(56.9%) collaborated with both types of partners, 78projects (15.5%) only with science-based partners, 68projects (13.5%) only with market-based partners, andthe remaining 71 projects (14.1%) had no external R&Dpartnerships. Project patent application. Project patent application is a variable indicating the number of patent ﬁlings byresearch projects. The variable is measured annually andindicates the number of patents applied for by theresearch project at the European Patent Ofﬁce (EPO) upto the observation year. We focus on EPO patent appli-cations because our sample ﬁrm is headquartered inEurope and follows the EPO system for the majority of itspatent applications. Technological complexity. Technological complexity measures the average complexity of the technologies thatare under development in a research project. Technolo-gies are considered complex when they focus on inven-tions that comprise multiple functionalities (Grifﬁn,1997) and patentable elements (Cohen et al., 2000). Priorliterature measured the complexity of technology ﬁeldsby the average number of patent claims 5in patents of that ﬁeld (Cohen et al., 2000; Harhoff and Reitzig, 2004). Toconstruct the --- claims 5in patents of that ﬁeld (Cohen et al., 2000; Harhoff and Reitzig, 2004). Toconstruct the complexity measure, we ﬁrst calculated theaverage number of patent claims in each different IPCfour-digit technology ﬁeld, using data on the worldwidestock of EPO patent applications per ﬁeld during theperiod 2000–2010. 6Second, after having identiﬁed the technological complexity of each IPC ﬁeld, we calculatedthe technological complexity of a particular researchproject as the average complexity of the different tech-nologies encompassed by that research project. Moredetails on the classiﬁcation of research projects to theirrespective technology ﬁelds can be found in the sectionon control variables. Two different cut-off values to dif-ferentiate between less and more complex projects areused in this paper: the 50th and 75th percentile of thecomplexity values in our sample. 5Patent claims provide clear and concise deﬁnitions of what the patent legally protects (OECD, 2009). 6There are approximately 640 different IPC four-digit technology ﬁelds.RESEARCH TRANSFER SPEED J PROD INNOV MANAG 1189 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Control Variables We added the following set of control variables to our analyses: Project resources. Project resources have been pointed out as a critical factor determining projectsuccess or failure (Barczak et al., 2009; Carbonell andRodriguez, 2006). We use the (log-transformed) numberof full time equivalent researchers (FTE) working on aresearch project as proxy of the size and the resourceendowments of the research project. This variable isrecorded on a yearly basis and is calculated in a cumula-tive way by adding FTEs over the research project’slifetime up to the observation year. Project technological ﬁelds. We use a set of dummy variables to denote the technological ﬁelds in which theresearch project is classiﬁed. Research projects thatfocus on different technological ﬁelds may face differ-ent challenges and generate distinct outcomes (Hall,Link, and Scott, 2003). We have followed a two-stepapproach to classify projects into their respective tech-nology ﬁelds: First, for projects that have applied forpatents, the technology class (IPC) information on theirpatent application ﬁles is used. If a patent contains mul-tiple technology classes, a project is assigned tomultiple technology ﬁelds. Second, the remaining proj-ects that have not (yet) applied for a patent are manuallyassigned to technology ﬁelds by using information onthe project’s content from the project titles, abstracts,and descriptions. Technology ﬁelds with a low numberof projects are grouped together into a rest category inthe analyses. Length of the research project. Project duration is another important factor that may affect the performanceof research projects. For instance, projects that last longermay enjoy more time for research, and thus have a higherpossibility to generate (more) transfers. In this paper, weuse the number of months a research project lasts as themeasure for project duration. This variable has beenreferred to as research cycle time in prior research (e.g.,Eling et al.,
This variable has beenreferred to as research cycle time in prior research (e.g.,Eling et al., 2013). Firm patent stock. This variable represents the tech- nical strength of the ﬁrm in the technology ﬁeld(s) towhich a research project belongs. Technical competencesof the ﬁrm in the ﬁeld under research are expected to be(at least partly) accessible to the project team. We take theﬁve-year prior patent stock of the sample ﬁrm to measurethe technical strength of the ﬁrm in the relevant technol- ogy ﬁelds of the research project (Du et al., 2014). Wehave collected EPO patent data for the sample ﬁrm at theconsolidated level, including patents that were assignedto the parent company or to its majority-owned subsid-iaries. The consolidation was done on a yearly basis totake into account changes in the ﬁrm group structure.Patents of subsidiaries that are acquired and divested are,respectively, added and removed from the patent stockfrom the year of acquisition or divestment. Due to thelong time-windows of patent granting decisions at theEPO, 7we use patent application data to construct ﬁrm patent stock. Project management formality. Following prior research (e.g., Cooper et al., 2004; Du et al., 2014), wecontrol for the extent to which research projects havefollowed a formalized management process; that is, theresearch projects were planned, monitored, and con-trolled in a formal way by the project management team.The management process of each project is evaluatedannually by the project manager. In line with prior work(Du et al., 2014), scores from 0 to 5 (a score of “0”means that the activity is not performed; a score of “5”indicates that great importance is given to the activity)are provided for each of the following three project man-agement activities: (1) regular review of the projectprocess, involving management, project owner, andproject sponsors; (2) during project reviews, correctiveactions are identiﬁed, documented, and tracked throughto project completion; (3)
reviews, correctiveactions are identiﬁed, documented, and tracked throughto project completion; (3) progress reports are madeavailable at the project level on a regular basis, includinginformation on project termination and transferredresults. The project management formality score is cal-culated as the average score on these three questions forprojects that last longer than one year; the average scoreover time is used. A higher score implies that the projectis managed in a more formal way by the project man-agement team. Number of projects under management. The more projects a project leader is actively managing, the lesstime he or she may devote to each individual project,which may negatively affect project performance(Geanakoplos and Milgrom, 1991). Projects that receivemore attention from their manager may enjoy timelyfeedback and generate faster research transfers. We usethe number of projects that a project leader is managing 7Patent granting decisions at the EPO take on average more than ﬁve years (Harhoff and Wagner, 2009).1190 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
stock have a higher probability to generate aresearch transfer. The results further show that researchprojects that are managed in a more formal way are morelikely to generate a research transfer to business units. Model 2 is the second step of the Heckman model where we regress the performance of research projects ontransfer speed (as measured by the number of months aproject takes to generate a ﬁrst research transfer). Wecontrol for the possible selection bias by including theinverse Mills ratio in the equation. The inverse Mills ratio 8Models with separate dummies for the 10 business units give very similar results.9We used the “number of research transfers after the ﬁrst delivery” as an alternative dependent variable. This speciﬁcation gave qualitatively thesame results.Table 1. Variable Deﬁnitions, Measures, and Categories Variable Name Measure Type Performance of research projects The number of transfers the research project generates Count (log transformed) Research transfer speed The speed of the ﬁrst transfer from research project to business unit ContinuousScience-based partnerships Collaboration with science-based partners BinaryMarket-based partnerships Collaboration with market-based partners BinaryProject patent application Number of patent applications at EPO CountTechnological complexity Technological complexity of the technology ﬁeld to which the research project belongsBinary Project resources Full time equivalent (FTE) researchers work on a project Count (log transformed) Project technological ﬁelds The technological ﬁelds the project is active in DummyLength of the research project The number of years a research project lasts CountFirm patent stock Previous ﬁve-year patent stock of the ﬁrm in the technological ﬁeld to which the project belongContinuous (log transformed) Project management formality Average score of project management proﬁciency on (1) regular review of the project process, (2) corrective actions during projectreviews, (3)
on (1) regular review of the project process, (2) corrective actions during projectreviews, (3) progress reports0–5 Likert scale Number of projects under management Number of projects a project leader is actively managing Count (log transformed) Sponsor department The sponsor of the project: Corporate Research or one of the Business UnitsBinary Project initiating year The year in which the research project is initiated DummyRESEARCH TRANSFER SPEED J PROD INNOV MANAG 1191 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
is signiﬁcant, showing that without controlling for this variable, our performance equation would suffer from asample selection bias. We also control for the length ofthe research project. The coefﬁcient of the transfer speedvariable is negative and signiﬁcant, conﬁrming H1:Research projects with a fast ﬁrst transfer (less monthsneeded to generate a ﬁrst transfer) to business units areassociated with a better research performance. 10Model 2 also shows that projects with a longer research cycle timeperform, on average, better than their counterparts with ashorter research cycle time. Antecedents of Transfer Speed Table 3 reports the regression results of Cox sharedfrailty analyses for the impact of market-based partner-ships, science-based partners, and (early) patent ﬁlings onthe transfer speed of ﬁrst research results. As the Coxmodel measures the rate at which a ﬁrst transfer is deliv- ered, a positive (negative) coefﬁcient indicates that thevariable accelerates (decelerates) transfer speed. Model 1is the baseline model with only control variables. Theresults suggest that projects that have more resources andthat are managed by project leaders who simultaneouslymanage multiple projects are linked to faster ﬁrst researchtransfers. Further, we ﬁnd that projects that are sponsoredby Corporate Research take a longer time to transfer theirﬁrst research results (have a slower transfer speed). The market-based and science-based partnership vari- ables are added to Model 2. A positive and signiﬁcanteffect is found for market-based partnerships on projecttransfer speed. This conﬁrms H2: Market-based partner-ships accelerate the transfer speed of ﬁrst research results.The regression results show that market-based partner-ships accelerate transfer speed by 69.55% ( =exp [.528]- 1). However, we do not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant effect forscience-based partnerships on project transfer speed. As aresult, we do not ﬁnd empirical support for H3, thatscience-based partnerships (universally)
As aresult, we do not ﬁnd empirical support for H3, thatscience-based partnerships (universally) speed up ﬁrstresearch transfers. Further, we add the patent application variable to our speciﬁcations in Model 3 and Model 4, respectively. Thecoefﬁcient of this variable is positive and signiﬁcant inboth models. This conﬁrms H4 that early patent ﬁlings inresearch projects speed up the transfer of ﬁrst researchresults to business units. The coefﬁcient shows that eachadditional patent application accelerates the transferspeed by 4.3% ( =exp [.042]-1). The inclusion of the patent variable has no material effect on the R&D part-nership variables. Finally, technological complexity is included as the moderating variable of market-based and science-basedpartnerships in Model 5 and Model 6. In Model 5, we usethe medium sample value of complexity (50th percentile)as cut-off value for technological complexity. In Model 6,we raise the bar of technological complexity to the 75thpercentile to differentiate between technologically verycomplex projects and the rest. The complexity variable isnegative and signiﬁcant in both models, indicating thatresearch projects that focus on complex technologies, ingeneral, take more time to transfer ﬁrst research results.The results further show that collaborations with market-based partners in general speed up the transfer process.Interestingly, while science-based partnerships do notuniversally speed up the transfer process of research proj-ects, they have an acceleration effect on projects that dealwith very complex technologies (as indicated by the posi-tive interaction effect in Model 6). Thus, H5 is only partlysupported: technological complexity only moderates the 10We also tested the possibility of a nonlinear relationship between transfer speed and project performance. However, no evidence of a curvi-linear relationship was found.Table 2. Heckman Two-Step Regressions on Transfer Speed and Performance of Research Projects VariablesModel
Heckman Two-Step Regressions on Transfer Speed and Performance of Research Projects VariablesModel Coefﬁcient Standard Error Selection equation (Model 1) Sponsor department −.460*** (.135) Project management formality .154* (.085)Firm patent stock .0937* (.0534)Project resources .721*** (.182)# Projects under management .123 (.1018)Constant 2.653 (1.994)Performance equation (Model 2)Transfer speed −.0308*** (.0062) Length of the project .0211*** (.0038)Project management formality −.0382 (.117) Firm patent stock .0094 (.0649)Project resources −.1581 (.254) # Projects under management −.0176 (.1313) Technology ﬁelds Included Included Initiating year dummies Included Included Constant −4.375*** (.772) Mills ratio −.892** (.435) Number of observations 503Number of censored observations 333Number of uncensored observations 170Wald test: χ 288.79*** Robust standard errors in parentheses: *** p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.1.1192 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
relationship between science-based partnerships and transfer speed. Conclusion and Discussions This paper focuses on the organization of R&D activitiesin large, R&D-intensive ﬁrms. In these ﬁrms, research istypically conducted in research projects within researchlabs. Product development, on the other hand, isexecuted by business units. Once research results areachieved, they are transferred from research projects tobusiness units for further development and commercial-ization. We investigated the antecedents of transfer speed(the time a research project takes to deliver its ﬁrstresearch result to a business unit) and the relationshipbetween transfer speed and the performance of researchprojects (measured by the total number of transfers a project generates). We found that fast ﬁrst research transfers are linked to a better research performance. Fast ﬁrst transfers give astrong positive signal to the project sponsors, increasingtheir conﬁdence in the research project they sponsor andtheir willingness to further fund their ongoing research.Moreover, a fast ﬁrst transfer enables research projects tocollect early feedback from business units, which can beused to improve their ongoing research. R&D partner-ships are found to be useful—under some conditions—tospeed up research transfers. While market-based partner-ships have a general positive effect on transfer speed, thespeeding-up effect of science-based partners is limited toprojects conducted in very complex technology ﬁelds.Furthermore, this study provides evidence that earlyTable 3. Cox Shared Frailty Regressions on the Antecedents of Project Transfer Speed Variables Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Market-based partnership (MB) .528*** .549*** .591** .567** (.201) (.205) (.302) (.232) Science-based partnership (SB) .0391 .0490 .078 −.139 (.197) (.201) (.295) (.225) Project patent applications .0423** .0449** .048** .0470** (.0183) (.0187) (.019) (.0192) Complexity (50th percentile) −.885* (.464)
.0449** .048** .0470** (.0183) (.0187) (.019) (.0192) Complexity (50th percentile) −.885* (.464) MB* complexity (50th percentile) .029 (.418) SB* complexity (50th percentile) .007 (.415) Complexity (75th percentile) −1.468** (.614) MB* complexity (75th percentile) −.0457 (.518) SB* complexity (75th percentile) .983* (.549) Project management formality .185 .173 .194 .169 .156 .150 (.114) (.119) (.120) (.122) (.127) (.129) Sponsoring department −.742*** −.734*** −.782*** −.732*** −.789*** −.768*** (.166) (.180) (.179) (.184) (.191) (.189) Firm patent stock .110 .143* .119 .138* .159* .130 (.075) (.0792) (.0791) (.0811) (.086) (.0845) Project resources .630*** .644*** .616*** .545** .666*** .602*** (.175) (.210) (.214) (.223) (.235) (.232) # Projects under management .734*** .824*** .831*** .849*** .929*** .900*** (.171) (.190) (.190) (.196) (.202) (.202) Project technological ﬁelds Included Included Included Included Included Included Project initiating year Included Included Included Included Included Included Observations 13,308 13,308 13,308 13,308 13,308 13,308Number of groups 503 503 503 503 503 503Number of events 170 170 170 170 170 170Log likelihood −911.7 −907.7 −909.0 −905.0 −901.06 −900.6 Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.1.RESEARCH TRANSFER SPEED J PROD INNOV MANAG 1193 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
patent ﬁlings by research projects accelerate the transfer of ﬁrst research results to business units. Somewhat surprisingly, we did not ﬁnd a universal acceleration effect of science-based partnerships on thetransfer of ﬁrst research results. This ﬁnding deservesfurther considerations. In R&D partnerships, coordina-tion may take substantial time when partners have diversegoals (Lorange, Roos, and Brønn, 1992), differentworking habits (Bstieler and Hemmert, 2010), anddistinct organizational cultures and thought worlds(Dougherty, 1992). In such situations, coordination andcommunication complexities (Gulati, 1998; Rothaermeland Deeds, 2006) may offset the potential beneﬁts ofpartnerships on transfer speed, or even extend the time toreach research transfers. These factors are likely to differaccording to the type of R&D partners involved. Forscience-based partners, bureaucratic hierarchy, inﬂexibil-ity, and different rewarding systems (Mowery, 1998) areexpected to hinder their efﬁciency in research transfers.Frictions resulting from different organizational culturesand perceptions (Bstieler and Hemmert, 2010) may alsoarise. Furthermore, science-based partners are ofteninvolved in government-funded projects (e.g., EuropeanFP-7 projects) which have complex administrationsystems and reporting formalities (quarterly or yearly).As a result, the ﬁrm and its science-based partnersinvolved in such projects are constrained in the transferprocess, as the structure and process are predeterminedby the government. These abovementioned factors mayjointly offer an explanation as to why we did not ﬁnd ageneral positive effect of science-based partnerships ontransfer speed. However, we ﬁnd an accelerating effect of science- based partnerships for a speciﬁc set of research projects,namely those that focus on (very) complex technologies.Drawing from their expertise in scientiﬁc research,science-based partners are well positioned to develop a“helicopter view” on complex technologies that
cycle time by studying the speed ofthe entire NPD process from ideation all the way down toproduct market launch (e.g., Cankurtaran et al., 2013;Chen et al., 2010). Consequently, “little is known aboutthe speciﬁc effects of the cycle times of the different NPDstages on NPD performance,” which “emphasizes theneed to conduct performance effect studies of NPD cycletime at the stage level rather than at the monolithicprocess level” (Eling et al., 2013, p. 626). We focused inthis paper on the research phase of NPD and more spe-ciﬁcally, the speed whereby research projects generateand transfer a ﬁrst set of research results to business units.As such, this paper contributes to the development of abetter and more nuanced understanding of NPD cycletime. Second, this paper contributes to the recent debatein cycle time studies whether having a shorter cycle timeis beneﬁcial or disadvantageous to NPD performance(Swink, Talluri, and Pandejpong, 2006). We ﬁnd that, atleast for the speed of ﬁrst research transfers, there is apositive relationship with performance. Third, this papercontributed to the NPD literature by introducing a newconceptual lens—the speed of research transfers—tomake early assessments of NPD performance. In doingso, this paper also adds to the intra-ﬁrm transactiontheory by emphasizing the importance of a fast deliveryof intermediate goods in intra-ﬁrm transactions betweenresearch projects and business units. Besides adding to the NPD literature, this paper also contributes to the open innovation literature by showing1194 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
hard evidence of the effect of R&D partnerships on the transfer speed of research projects. Responding to the callof Chesbrough et al. (2006) that “neither the practice ofnor research on open innovation are limited to the levelof the ﬁrm” (p. 287), in this paper we analyzed openinnovation at a more reﬁned level, being the projectlevel (Chesbrough, Vanhaverbeke, and West, 2014;Vanhaverbeke et al., 2014). Moreover, this paper added tothe existing open innovation literature by investigatingthe “time” aspect—the effect on transfer speed—of dif-ferent open innovation partnerships. Despite the burgeon-ing studies on the effects of open innovation on a widerange of performance dimensions, such as ﬁnancials (Duet al., 2014), cost savings (Knudsen and Mortensen,2011), number and share of innovative products (Faemset al., 2005; Laursen and Salter, 2006), whether R&Dpartnerships increase the time efﬁciency of the NPDprocess remained an open question in the open innovationliterature. In this paper, we made a ﬁrst contribution tothis line of research by empirically studying the effect ofdifferent types of open innovation partnerships (market-based and science-based partnerships) on the speed ofﬁrst research transfers. The ﬁndings help to develop amore holistic understanding about the effects of openinnovation. Managerial Implications Several managerial implications can be drawn from thisstudy. This paper shows that, when little information isavailable in the early research phase for project sponsorsto assess the potential of research projects, a good strat-egy for research projects is to have an early ﬁrst researchtransfer. Instead of being prudent in continuing to reﬁneinitial research results, the research project may actuallybe better off if presenting initial research results to busi-ness units early on in the research process. A fast ﬁrsttransfer can improve the conﬁdence of the projectsponsor on the capabilities of the research project, which,in turn, gives the research
the projectsponsor on the capabilities of the research project, which,in turn, gives the research project a better position tonegotiate additional research funding to sustain its furtherresearch. Next, regarding the strategic choices of a research project to speed up its transfer of research outcomes, ourﬁndings suggest that collaboration with external R&Dpartners is no panacea under all circumstances when itcomes to speeding up research transfers. Instead, theeffect of R&D partnerships on the transfer speed ofresearch projects depends on the type of partners involvedin the collaboration process and the technological com-plexity of the research project. Market-based partnershipsin general contribute to fast ﬁrst research transfers, while science-based partnerships are found to be only beneﬁcialin accelerating ﬁrst research transfers of technologicallyvery complex projects. As a result, R&D managers inlarge, R&D-intensive ﬁrms need to choose the type ofpartners based on the objectives and the characteristics ofthe research project. Other factors hold equal, for projectsin less complex technology ﬁelds, if there is time pressureto quickly transfer research results, teaming up withmarket-based partners may be a better strategy, comparedto collaborating with science-based partners. While fortechnologically very complex projects, both types ofexternal partnerships are helpful to speed up ﬁrst researchtransfers. Last but not least, our research results suggest that, in terms of transfer speed, it is beneﬁcial for a researchproject to ﬁle patents early on in the research process, asearly patent ﬁlings are instrumental in speeding up ﬁrstresearch transfers. Early patent applications help tocodify research results, and facilitate knowledge ﬂowsbetween the research team and the potential businessrecipients. Moreover, early patent applications alsoprovide an option to legally protect technologies underresearch, improving the attractiveness to business units. Limitations and
protect technologies underresearch, improving the attractiveness to business units. Limitations and Future Research Although we handled our research with great care, thisstudy has several limitations. First, beyond the factorsthat we included in our conceptual model, there may beother factors that determine the speed of ﬁrst researchtransfers. We encourage scholars to further enrich ourconceptual framework by studying additional determi-nants of transfer speed, such as the potential role of inter-nal partnerships between research projects and businessunits. Research projects that have strong internal links to(multiple) business units may be better positioned to ﬁndrecipients for their research results and therefore to speedup research transfers. Second, our dataset does not allow us to gain insights on the identity of external partners of research projects.This limitation prevents us from performing a more ﬁne-grained analysis on the role of R&D partnerships inspeeding up transfers and from including measures on thequality of partner involvement. We believe that splittingR&D partnerships into more ﬁnely grained categorieswill help to further improve our understanding on the roleof R&D partnerships. Further, we encourage futurestudies to explore the interplay of market-based andscience-based partnerships with respect to transfer speed.Of special interest is the question whether both types ofRESEARCH TRANSFER SPEED J PROD INNOV MANAG 1195 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
R&D partnerships act as complements or substitutes to each other. Finally, it may be interesting to check to whatextent our results hold across different ﬁrms and indus-tries than our sample ﬁrm. References Allen, F., and G. Faulhaber. 1988. Optimism invites deception. The Quar- terly Journal of Economics 103 (2): 397–407. Almeida, P., J. Song, and R. Grant. 2002. Are ﬁrms superior to alliances and markets? An empirical test of cross-border knowledge building. Orga- nization Science 13 (2): 147–61. Argyres, N. S., and B. S. Silverman. 2004. R&D, organization structure, and the development of corporate technological knowledge. Strategic Management Journal 25 (8–9): 929–58. Arora, A., and M. Ceccagnoli. 2006. Patent protection, complementary assets, and ﬁrms’ incentives for technology licensing. Management Science 52 (2): 293–308. Arora, A., M. Ceccagnoli, and W. M. Cohen. 2008. R&D and the patent premium. International Journal of Industrial Organization 26 (5): 1153–79. Barczak, G., A. Grifﬁn, and K. B. Kahn. 2009. Perspective: Trends and drivers of success in NPD practices: Results of the 2003 PDMA bestpractices study. Journal of Product Innovation Management 26 (1): 3–23. Belderbos, R., B. Leten, and S. Suzuki. 2013. How global is R&D? Firm- level determinants of home-country bias in R&D. Journal of Interna- tional Business Studies 44 (8): 765–86. Blossfeld, H. P., K. Golsch, and G. Rohwer. 2007. Event history analysis with Stata . Mahwah, NJ: Taylor & Francis. Brown, S., and K. Eisenhardt. 1995. Product development: Past research, present ﬁndings, and future directions. Academy of Management Review 20 (2): 343–78. Brusoni, S., A. Prencipe, and K. Pavitt. 2001. Knowledge specialization, organizational coupling, and the boundaries of the ﬁrm: Why do ﬁrmsknow more than they make? Administrative Science Quarterly 46 (4): 597–621. Bstieler, L., and M. Hemmert. 2010. Increasing learning and time efﬁciency in interorganizational new product development teams. Journal of
learning and time efﬁciency in interorganizational new product development teams. Journal of Product Innovation Management 27 (4): 485–99. Cankurtaran, P., F. Langerak, and A. Grifﬁn. 2013. Consequences of new product development speed: A meta-analysis. Journal of Product Inno- vation Management 30 (3): 465–86. Carbonell, P., and A. I. Rodriguez. 2006. Designing teams for speedy product development: The moderating effect of technological complex-ity.Journal of Business Research 59 (2): 225–32. Castellion, G., and S. K. Markham. 2013. Perspective: New product failure rates: Inﬂuence of argumentum ad populum and felf-interest. Journal of Product Innovation Management 30 (5): 976–79. Chen, J. Y ., F. Damanpour, and R. R. Reilly. 2010. Understanding anteced- ents of new product development speed: A meta-analysis. Journal of Operations Management 28 (1): 17–33. Chesbrough, H. 2003. Open innovation: The new imperative for creating and proﬁting from technology . Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. Chesbrough, H. 2006. Open business models: How to thrive in the new innovation landscape . Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. Chesbrough, H., W. Vanhaverbeke, and J. West, eds. 2006. Open innova- tion: Researching a new paradigm . Oxford: Oxford University Press. Chesbrough, H., W. Vanhaverbeke, and J. West, eds. 2014. New frontiers in open innovation . Oxford: Oxford University Press.Chidamber, S. R., and H. B. Kon. 1994. A research retrospective of inno- vation inception and success: The technology-push, demand-pull ques-tion. International Journal of Technology Management 9 (1): 94–112. Clift, T. B., and M. B. Vandenbosch. 1999. Project complexity and efforts to reduce product development cycle time. Journal of Business Research 45 (2): 187–98. Cockburn, I. M., and R. M. Henderson. 1998. Absorptive capacity, coau- thoring behavior, and the organization of research in drug discovery.The Journal of Industrial Economics 46 (2): 157–82. Cohen, W. M., R. R. Nelson, --- and E. J. Hultink. 2006. The impact of product innovativeness on the link between development speed and new product proﬁtability.Journal of Product Innovation Management 23 (3): 203–14. Laursen, K., and A. Salter. 2006. Open for innovation: The role of openness in explaining innovation performance among UK manufacturing ﬁrms.Strategic Management Journal 27 (2): 131–50. Leten, B., W. Vanhaverbeke, N. Roijakkers, A. Clerix, and J. Van Helleputte. 2013. IP models to orchestrate innovation ecosystems:IMEC, a public research institute in nano-electronics. California Man- agement Review 55 (4): 51–64. Lorange, P., J. Roos, and P. S. Brønn. 1992. Building successful strategic alliances. Long Range Planning 25 (6): 10–17. Markham, S. K. 2013. The impact of front-end innovation activities on product performance. Journal of Product Innovation Management 30 (S1): 77–92. Mowery, D. C. 1998. The changing structure of the US national innovation system: Implications for international conﬂict on cooperation andR&D. Research Policy 27: 639–54.Narula, R., and J. Hagedoorn. 1999. Innovating through strategic alliances: Moving towards international partnerships and contractual agreements.Technovation 19 (5): 283–94. Nonaka, I. 1994. A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation. Organization Science 5 (1): 14–37. OECD. 2009. OECD patent statistics manual . Paris: OECD Publishing. Paul, S. M., D. S. Mytelka, C. T. Dunwiddie, C. C. Persinger, B. H. Munos, S. R. Lindborg, and A. L. Schacht. 2010. How to improve R&D pro-ductivity: The pharmaceutical industry’s grand challenge. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 9 (3): 203–14. Rosenberg, N. 1990. Why do ﬁrms do basic research (with their own money)? Research Policy 19 (2): 165–74. Rotemberg, J. J. 1991. A theory of inefﬁcient intraﬁrm transactions. The American Economic Review 81 (1): 191–209. Rothaermel, F. T., and D. L. Deeds. 2006. Alliance type, alliance experience and alliance management capability in high-technology --- 2006. Alliance type, alliance experience and alliance management capability in high-technology ventures.Journal of Business Venturing 21 (4): 429–60. Rycroft, R. W., and D. E. Kash. 1999. The complexity challenge: Techno- logical innovation for the 21st century . New York: Pinter. Schilling, M. A., and C. W. L. Hill. 1998. Managing the new product development process: Strategic imperatives. Academy of Management Executive 12 (3): 67–81. Schoonhoven, C. B., K. Eisenhardt, and K. Lyman. 1990. Speeding prod- ucts to market: Waiting time to ﬁrst product introduction in new ﬁrms.Administrative Science Quarterly 35 (1): 177–207. Swink, M., S. Talluri, and T. Pandejpong. 2006. Faster, better, cheaper: A study of NPD project efﬁciency and performance tradeoffs. Journal of Operations Management 24 (5): 542–62. Tao, J., and V . Magnotta. 2006. How air products and chemicals “identiﬁes and accelerates. Research Technology Management 49 (5): 12–8. Ulwick, A. W. 2002. Turn customer input into innovation. Harvard Busi- ness Review 80 (1): 91–97. Vanhaverbeke, W., J. Du, B. Leten, and F. Aalders. 2014. Exploring open innovation at the level of R&D projects. In New frontiers in open innovation , ed. H. Chesbrough, W. Vanhaverbeke, and J. West, 115–31. Oxford: Oxford University Press. von Hippel, E. 1986. Lead users: A source of novel product concepts. Management Science 32 (7): 791–805. von Hippel, E., and R. Katz. 2002. Shifting innovation to users via toolkits. Management Science 48 (7): 821–33. von Zedtwitz, M., and O. Gassmann. 2002. Market versus technology drive in R&D internationalization: Four different patterns of managingresearch and development. Research Policy 31 (4): 569–88. Woodruff, R. B. 1997. Customer value: The next source for competitive advantage. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 25 (2): 139– 53. Zander, U., and B. Kogut. 1995. Knowledge and the speed of the transfer and imitation of organizational capabilities: An empirical test. Organi- zation
(2): 255–67. Faems, D., B. Van Looy, and K. Debackere. 2005. Interorganizational collaboration and innovation: Toward a portfolio approach. Journal of Product Innovation Management 22 (3): 238–50. Fleming, L., and O. Sorenson. 2004. Science as a map in technological search. Strategic Management Journal 25 (8–9): 909–28. Geanakoplos, J., and P. Milgrom. 1991. A theory of hierarchies based on limited managerial attention. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 5 (3): 205–25. Grant, R. M., and C. Baden-Fuller. 2004. A knowledge accessing theory of strategic alliances. Journal of Management Studies 41 (1): 61–84. Grifﬁn, A. 1993. Metrics for measuring product development cycle time. Journal of Product Innovation Management 10 (2): 112–25. Grifﬁn, A. 1997. The effect of project and process characteristics on product development cycle time. Journal of Marketing Research 34 (1): 24–35. Gulati, R. 1998. Alliances and networks. Strategic Management Journal 19 (4): 293–317. Hagedoorn, J. 1993. Understanding the rationale of strategic technology partnering: Inter-organizational modes of cooperation and sectoral dif-ferences. Strategic Management Journal 14 (5): 371–85. Hall, B. H., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg. 2005. Market value and patent citations. The Rand Journal of Economics 36 (1): 16–38.1196 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Hall, B. H., A. N. Link, and J. T. Scott. 2003. Universities as research partners. The Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (2): 485–91. Harhoff, D., and M. Reitzig. 2004. Determinants of opposition against EPO patent grants—The case of biotechnology and pharmaceuticals. Inter- national Journal of Industrial Organization 22 (4): 443–80. Harhoff, D., and S. Wagner. 2009. The duration of patent examination at the European patent ofﬁce. Management Science 55 (12): 1969–84. Harrison, D., and A. Waluszewski. 2008. The development of a user network as a way to re-launch an unwanted product. Research Policy 37 (1): 115–30. Henderson, R., and K. Clark. 1990. Architectural innovation: The reconﬁguration of existing product technologies and the failure ofestablished ﬁrms. Administrative Science Quarterly 35 (1): 9–30. Huber, F. 2012. On the role and interrelationship of spatial, social and cognitive proximity: Personal knowledge relationships of R&Dworkers in the Cambridge information technology cluster. Regional Studies 46 (9): 1169–82. Kahn, K. B., G. Castellion, and A. Grifﬁn. 2005. The PDMA handbook of new product development . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Kessler, E. H., and A. K. Chakrabarti. 1999. Speeding up the pace of new product development. Journal of Product Innovation Management 16 (3): 231–47. Knudsen, M., and T. Mortensen. 2011. Some immediate—but negative— effects of openness on product development performance.Technovation 31 (1): 54–64. Kogut, B., and U. Zander. 1993. Knowledge of the ﬁrm and the evolution- ary theory of the multinational corporation. Journal of International Business Studies 24 (4): 625–45. Kotabe, M. 1992. Global sourcing strategy: R&D, manufacturing, and marketing interfaces . Westport, CT: Quorum Books. Kultti, K., T. Takalo, and J. Toikka. 2007. Secrecy versus patenting. The Rand Journal of Economics 38 (1): 22–42. Langerak, F., and E. J. Hultink. 2006. The impact of product innovativeness on the link between development speed
Appendix A. Descriptive Statistics and Correlations (Cox Regressions: Monthly Records) Mean S.D. 1 2 3 456789 1. Market-based partners 0.608 0.488 1.000 2. Science-based partners 0.693 0.461 0.245 1.0003. Technological complexity (75 percentile) 0.219 0.414 −0.036 0.068 1.000 4. Sponsor department 0.582 0.493 −0.155 0.053 0.016 1.000 5. Number of patent applications 0.890 4.738 0.040 0.058 0.007 −0.042 1.000 6. Firm patent stock 5.771 2.120 0.026 −0.075 −0.145 −0.010 0.008 1.000 7. Project resources 1.892 0.595 0.243 0.282 0.034 0.020 0.230 0.017 1.0008. Project management formality 3.956 0.824 0.146 −0.016 0.001 −0.200 0.028 −0.013 0.068 1.000 9. # Projects under management 3.298 0.804 0.050 0.142 0.013 −0.036 0.013 −0.207 0.223 −0.053 1.000 (n=13,308). Appendix B. Descriptive Statistics and Correlations (Heckman Two-Step: Transferred Projects) Mean S.D. 1 2 3456 7 1. Total # of transfers 3.594 4.074 1.000 2. # Months to transfer 16.19 10.52 −0.215 1.000 3. Length of the project 44.95 20.01 0.297 0.311 1.0004. Project management formality 4.087 0.740 0.156 0.168 0.127 1.0005. Firm patent stock 6.260 1.934 0.162 −0.098 0.082 0.075 1.000 6. Project resources 1.451 0.392 0.154 −0.030 −0.087 0.125 0.078 1.000 7. # Projects under management 3.307 0.742 −0.235 0.210 −0.370 0.066 −0.167 0.130 1.000 (n=170).1198 J PROD INNOV MANAG J. DU ET AL. 2014;31(6):1181–1198  15405885, 2014, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jpim.12249 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [23/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
En el estudio "When Research Meets Development: Antecedents and Implications of Transfer Speed", se analiza la organización del desarrollo de nuevos productos en empresas intensivas en I+D. Se destaca la separación de las actividades de investigación y desarrollo, con la investigación realizada en proyectos dedicados en laboratorios especializados y la transferencia de resultados a las unidades de negocio para su desarrollo y comercialización. El estudio investiga la velocidad de transferencia de los proyectos de investigación y su relación con el rendimiento de la investigación.

Basado en datos de 503 proyectos de investigación de una empresa manufacturera europea intensiva en I+D, se encontró que una velocidad de transferencia rápida está asociada con un mejor rendimiento de investigación. Se observó que diferentes tipos de socios externos de I+D, basados en la ciencia y en el mercado, desempeñan roles distintos en acelerar las transferencias de investigación. Las asociaciones basadas en el mercado contribuyen a una transferencia más rápida de los primeros resultados de investigación, mientras que las asociaciones basadas en la ciencia solo aceleran las transferencias de proyectos tecnológicamente complejos. Además, se encontró que las presentaciones tempranas de patentes aceleran las transferencias de investigación.

En la introducción, se destaca la importancia del desarrollo de nuevos productos para la supervivencia y renovación de las empresas en el panorama industrial competitivo actual. Se menciona que en muchas industrias, los nuevos productos representan más del 50% de las ventas anuales de las empresas. Se describe el proceso de transferencia interna de los proyectos de investigación a las unidades de negocio, donde los proyectos de investigación operan como un centro de costos y las unidades de negocio como un centro de beneficios. Se resalta la importancia de que las unidades de negocio tomen decisiones de transferencia correctas para seleccionar los proyectos de investigación más prometedores.

En resumen, el estudio aborda la importancia de la velocidad de transferencia en el desarrollo de nuevos productos en empresas intensivas en I+D, analizando los factores que influyen en esta velocidad y sus implicaciones en el rendimiento de la investigación. Se destaca la importancia de la colaboración con socios externos, la presentación temprana de patentes y la gestión eficiente de proyectos para acelerar las transferencias de investigación y mejorar el rendimiento del desarrollo de nuevos productos.
