Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cbse20 British Journal of Sociology of Education ISSN: 0142-5692 (Print) 1465-3346 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/cbse20 ‘The degree is not enough ’: students ’ perceptions of the role of higher education credentials for graduate work and employability Michael Tomlinson To cite this article:  Michael Tomlinson (2008) ‘The degree is not enough ’: students ’ perceptions of the role of higher education credentials for graduate work and employability, British Journal of Sociology of Education, 29:1, 49-61, DOI: 10.1080/01425690701737457 To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/01425690701737457 Published online: 11 Jan 2008. Submit your article to this journal  Article views: 27383 View related articles  Citing articles: 124 View citing articles
British Journal of Sociology of Education Vol. 29, No. 1, January 2008, 49–61 ISSN 0142-5692 print/ISSN 1465-3346 online © 2008 Taylor & FrancisDOI: 10.1080/01425690701737457http://www.informaworld.com ‘The degree is not enough’: students’ perceptions of the role of higher  education credentials for graduate work and employability Michael Tomlinson* Cardiff Business School, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK Taylor and FrancisCBSE_A_273688.sgm(Received 14 August 2006; final version received 26 June 2007 ) 10.1080/01425690701737457British Journal of Sociology of Education0142-5692 (print)/1465-3346 (online)Original Article2008Taylor & Francis291000000January 2008MichaelTomlinsontomlinsonmb1@cardiff.ac.uk; tomlinsonmb1@cf.ac.ukThe UK Government is calling upon higher education students to see their learning as an investment that will give them direct benefits in the labour market. At the same time, therelationship between educational credentials and their returns in labour market has beenchanging in recent times. Based on a qualitative study with 53 final-year undergraduatestudents in a pre-1992 university, this article examines the way higher education studentsunderstand the role of their educational credentials in relation to their future employability. Itshows that students perceive their academic qualifications as having a declining role in shapingtheir employment outcomes in what is perceived to be a congested and competitive graduatelabour market. While academic credentials are still seen as a significant dimension of theiremployability, students increasingly see the need to add value to them in order to gain anadvantage in the labour market. Keywords: mass higher education; graduate employability; human capital; credentials;  positional competition Introduction The UK Government continues to emphasise the importance of higher education credentials, at both a social and individual level. Higher education credentials have been presented as crucial foreconomic
and individual level. Higher education credentials have been presented as crucial foreconomic development, particularly in meeting the changing needs of the knowledge-driven econ-omy (Bell 1973; Castells 1994). They are also seen as a way of providing individuals with accessto opportunities in the labour market (Department for Education and Skills [DfES] 2003). Withthe advent of course fees in the late 1990s and the more recent introduction of variable tuition feesfollowing the 2004 Higher Education Act (DfES 2004), students are bearing significantly morecosts towards their participation in higher education. These costs have typically been justified bypolicy-makers on the grounds that graduates experience significant financial and personal benefitsfrom participating in higher education. Thus, in the words of the DfES White Paper:  Graduates and those who have ‘sub-degree’ qualifications earn, on average, around 50 per cent more than non-graduates … and, as a group they have enjoyed double the number of job promotions overthe past five years. (DfES 2003, para 5.5, 59) There are two main competing interpretations of the relationship between higher education credentials and labour market outcomes. The first is the human capital, or technocratic, interpre-tation. The second is the positional conflict, or credentialist, interpretation. Both posit markedlydifferent understandings about the role of higher education credentials as a source of economicgrowth, and the role of credentials in individual employability and labour market outcomes. *Email: tomlinsonmb1@cf.ac.uk
50  M. Tomlinson Higher education policy has been largely built around some of the main conceptual and empirical ideas of human capital theory (Shultz 1961; Becker 1993). Underpinning the humancapital model is the idea of a clear, direct and linear relationship between the expansion of educa-tional credentials and economic development. At a more detailed level, human capital theoryviews participation in education and training as an investment that yields both social and privatereturns (Ashton and Green 1996). The social benefits manifest themselves in the form of a highlyskilled, flexible workforce as reflected in levels of national economic output (Organisation forEconomic Development and Cooperation 2003). The private returns are reflected in higherindividual earnings over time, as well as better career progression opportunities and wider labourmarket scope. Indeed, one of the primary justifications of the recent introduction of variable top-up fees has been the clear positional advantage that investment in higher education brings forindividual graduates, as evidenced in the so-called ‘graduate premium’, which they can expect toreceive when they enter the job market (DfES 2004). Higher education is therefore seen to be ashared investment between the individual graduates and the state, with both clearly benefitingfrom continued expansion. The theory also stipulates that people’s decisions around participation in education and training operate at a micro and highly individualised level, based ultimately on the principles ofrational choice (Abell 1991). Individuals, so the theory goes, make autonomous, careful anddeliberate choices, weighing up the perceived benefits of participation against the perceivedcosts. Driving these decisions is a utilitarian and self-optimising pursuit towards maximisingone’s labour market potential. The assumptions that underlie the human capital and rational choice model are in direct contrast to the positional conflict and credentialist
and rational choice model are in direct contrast to the positional conflict and credentialist interpretation of the relationship betweeneducational credentials and employment (Collins 1979; Hirsch 1977; Brown 2000). Positionalconflict approaches have been influenced largely by Weberian notions of power and monopoly;in particular, the way in which social groups use credentials to mobilise cultural and economicadvantage (Weber 1948). Exponents of the credentialist model argue that the rise in credentialsin no way reflects a genuine economic demand for more highly qualified labour, so oftenpresented in recent government policy. Authors such as Collins and Hirsch argue that the spreadof educational credentials is adding little or no value to individuals’ human capital. They furtherargue that the expansion of higher education, and concordant growth in credentials, has corre-sponded with the expansion of the middle classes, generating growing pressures for individualsto acquire further credentials to access jobs. Instead of reflecting an increase in the skills andknowledge demands needed to do jobs,  the upsurge in higher education credentials simply means that the stakes have been raised for what is needed to get jobs . Recent research has brought into question the link between graduate supply and economic growth, and has challenged the supply-side focus of much policy thinking on higher educationexpansion (Mason 2002; Keep and Mayhew 2004). This research has questioned the economicdemand for the increasing supply of graduates and the capacity of the labour market to accom-modate the upsurge in graduate credentials. There is further evidence to suggest that an increasingamount of graduates are overqualified for the types of employment they attain (Battu, Belfieldand Sloane 2000; Brynin 2002). One conclusion to be drawn from these studies is that growingnumbers of graduates are increasingly colonising areas of the labour market that were once occu-pied by non-graduates,
are increasingly colonising areas of the labour market that were once occu-pied by non-graduates, leading to a potential mismatch between their level of qualification andits market utility. Such evidence therefore brings into question the importance of a universitydegree for the skill requirements of many graduate-level jobs. The credentialist model further highlights the conflict, power play and positional differences among individuals, both between and within the middle classes. A key issue here is the way in which individuals use, or attempt to use, various cultural resources and mobilise forms of
British Journal of Sociology of Education  51 capital – economic, social and cultural – for the return of labour market outcomes (Schuller, Baron and Field 2000). As Brown (2000) argues, the middle classes have traditionally been ableto establish a positional advantage in the labour market, largely through the use of wider educa-tional and cultural resources. Historically, higher education credentials, particularly those thatdenoted elite status, have been used to reproduce class advantage and provide access to labourmarket outcomes. The graduateness  associated with higher education credentials has tradition- ally served as a ‘status confirmation’ for the middle (and aspiring middle) classes, legitimisingeducational and occupational advantage. However, with the expansion of the middle classes, theshift towards mass higher education as well as changing notions of graduate skills and compe-tence, there has been a decline and status of these credentials. This is consequently bringingabout tension and anxiety amongst the middle classes who have to find new ways of winning apositional advantage in an increasingly competitive labour market. Recent evidence has shown that these types of tensions are being played out in graduates’ early experiences of the job market. In their study of graduate recruitment, Brown and Hesketh(2004) have shown the declining importance employers are attaching to academic credentials,and the increasing importance instead given to personal attributes and skills. Graduates may bevalued for their cognitive abilities and academic knowledge, yet the discourse of graduateemployability appears to be moving away from credentials that are merely a ‘tick in the box’.Their study shows that employers are increasingly defining employability more around notionsof ‘behavioural competence’ and the capacity for graduates to demonstrate and deploy a widerrange of range of personal, peformative and organisational abilities. While this in part may reflectthe
of range of personal, peformative and organisational abilities. While this in part may reflectthe changing organisational demands of many graduate employers, it may also be a means oflegitimising recruitment decisions when large numbers of graduates with similar educationalprofiles are competing for highly sought-after employment. Ultimately, the stakes for graduateemployment appear to have risen and the markers changed. This may be leading to tensions andchallenges for graduates seeking to capitalise upon their participation in higher education, and thecredentials they achieve from it, for their future work and employability. Focus of study and methods This research focuses on the way higher education students understand and interpret the role of their higher education credentials in shaping their future outcomes in the labour market in thecontext of these wider changes. This article draws upon research that has examined the way inwhich higher education students, on the verge of making the transition into the labour market,understand their future work and employability. One particular focus was on higher educationstudents’ perceptions of the utility of their higher education credentials, as well as its perceivedand anticipated role in opening up opportunities in the labour market. This focus is based princi-pally around the main research question: How do higher education students view the role of theirdegree credentials in shaping future employment prospects? In addressing this question, we notonly seek to explore students’ constructions of changes in higher education and the graduatelabour market, but also how they come to rationalise the role of their higher education credentialsfor future labour market return. Moreover, we will be able to examine the various theoretical posi-tions outlined in the introduction to this article that have aimed to explain the relationshipbetween educational credentials and labour market returns. Thus, to what extent do students
educational credentials and labour market returns. Thus, to what extent do students viewtheir higher education credential as crucial a development in their human capital that will yieldclear and financially rewarding returns? To what extent do they view their pursuit for labourmarket returns as involving a positional competition between graduates? The study drew upon semi-structured interviews with 53 final-year undergraduates in a pre- 1992 UK university, and the sample included a roughly equal gender mix (28 females and
52  M. Tomlinson 25 males). Students were drawn equally from a range of subject disciplines under the four main categories of social sciences (sociology, education, social policy), arts/humanities (Englishliterature and history), physical sciences (biological sciences and chemistry) and vocational(engineering, law business studies, media studies). Owing to the social composition of the univer-sity from where these students were drawn, the overwhelming majority were from middle-classprofessional backgrounds. Only three students could be classed as coming from occupationalgroups v–vi, whereby both parents were in low-skilled, manual work, and only two students werefrom ethnic minority backgrounds. Although this sample is limited to one particular institution,the experiences of ‘traditional’ students have been largely under-investigated, and so these dataadd to recent research on students and graduates from less traditional backgrounds in newerhigher education institutions (Moreau and Leathwood 2006; Reay, David and Ball 2006). More-over, while the absolute growth in participation of non-traditional students has risen, studentsfrom professional middle-class backgrounds continue to be the most representative participants(and potential beneficiaries) of higher education (DfES 2003). Relating higher education credentials to future labour market outcomes The first clear finding to emerge from the data was the importance students ascribe to their higher education credentials for their future labour market outcomes. It was clear from their responsesthat they viewed the acquisition of higher education qualifications as a significant boost to theirlevel of human capital, which would provide them with advantages in the labour market. To thisextent, their higher education credentials were seen as positional goods and a key dimension oftheir future employability. Strongly implicit in students’ views was the sense that highereducation qualifications would open up a wider range of
in students’ views was the sense that highereducation qualifications would open up a wider range of economic, occupational and socialopportunities that might otherwise be limited. In many ways, students were quick to differentiatebetween graduate and non-graduate credentials and the different opportunity structures associ-ated with both – as was anticipated by this economics student:  I think graduates get a lot more special treatment compared to the rest of people looking for jobs. If you go to these firms’ websites there’s nearly always a section there for graduates, other than thatthere’s just a general section… from what I understand at the moment firms are recruiting lessgraduates than in previous years, but with the larger firms a lot of the focus is definitely placed ongraduates. (Oliver, male) Indeed, the students in this study appeared to have internalised the wider discourse of the ‘graduate as higher earner’ so dominant in much of the policy discourse on higher education fund-ing and expansion. There was a tendency, therefore, to make a distinction between those whopossessed formal higher education credentials and those who did not in terms their ability toaccess various opportunity structures in the labour market. These perceptions are typified in theviews of the following biological sciences student who anticipated that:  In terms of getting a job it’s very much a case of those who have got a degree and those who haven’t. I think the days where people started off in a company and worked their way up are very much a thingof the past … it’s definitely worth doing a degree to make yourself more employable. (Gareth, male) It appears that much of the value students attach to their degree credentials is derived from their anticipated role in opening up labour market opportunities and providing them withpositional advantages. The data in this study point to a widespread perception among students thattheir higher education credentials are vital commodities in
perception among students thattheir higher education credentials are vital commodities in the pursuit of relatively well-paid,high-status and rewarding forms of graduate employment. Indeed, as one social science studentanticipated, such opportunities might not otherwise be available had she chosen not to participatein higher education:
British Journal of Sociology of Education  53 I think that if you don’t have a degree you get to a certain point where you can’t get any higher because everybody above you has a degree, so I guess you have to be unique to do that without one,but it would be very difficult. So I mean, that was very much with me when I was applying touniversity … like what would I end up without a degree? (Christine, female) The notion of the higher education credential as a positional good clearly resonates with these students. It is clear that they have anticipated what they perceive to be substantial opportunitycosts associated with non-participation. However, reading between students’ accounts, it is alsoclear that their perceptions of their credentials do not necessarily conform to the human capitaland rational choice framework outlined earlier. It would appear that the notion of highereducation as an ‘investment’ does not adequately capture students’ own sense of why they areparticipating in higher education. A distinction has been outlined by Fevre, Rees and Gorard(1999) between participation in post-compulsory education based on crude investment and thatbased on the perceived positional and consumptive value of credentials. They argue that youngpeople’s decisions around participating in further levels of education are based on the latter, interms of what they call instrumental credentialism.  Educational credentials are primarily pursued because of their perceived positional value and advantages in providing access to employment.This is likely to be the case even though they might not have any direct, immediate or transferablevalue in the labour market. For students who had a limited sense of how they might be able toapply their credentials, this gave rise to little more than a vague sense that it would ‘lead tosomething’. As the following history student remarked:  One of the main reasons I chose to enter university was because of the degree and what it can offer me for the
main reasons I chose to enter university was because of the degree and what it can offer me for the future. You do hear of all these horror stories of graduate working in Burger King orwhatever … but I do think that it will help in the long run, like it will benefit me and give me an edgeover someone who didn’t go to university. (Alison, female) Such views further relate to what was a widespread perception of external pressures placed upon young people to invest in higher education in order to maximise their chances in thecompetition for jobs. There was a strong sense amongst the students in the study of being caughtup in inflation of credentials that would increasingly be needed as a means for ‘staying ahead’ inthe job market. It was evident that students were just as likely to view their participation inhigher education as a ‘defensive expenditure’ (Thurow 1977) and a way of avoiding the other-wise negative labour market consequences of not possessing them. There was strong evidenceof students’ sense of the limitations of not acquiring higher education qualification and ofpotentially negating future opportunities. This is reflected in the views of Tony and Kate, bothof whom were clearly aware that their decisions around participating in higher education wereheavily bounded by wider educational and labour market milieu that framed what they saw asbeing appropriate choices. Even though Tony had a clear set of aims for his career prior toembarking upon higher education, these were offset by concerns about the limited alternativelabour market options:  Well there was very little choice other than to come to university quite frankly. It seemed the only thing to do. I also had a sense that I would probably end up stacking shelves otherwise … so I alwaysknew that if I wanted to do something worthwhile I would need a degree. (Tony, male, engineeringstudent) In Kate’s case, her views on higher education and its potential relationship with future labour market trajectory
her views on higher education and its potential relationship with future labour market trajectory appeared to be informed by a strong sense of restricted alternative options toparticipating in higher education:  It was either to come to university or work in some random office job for the rest of my life. It does seem to have changed a bit, like previously you might have been able to get a decent job on leavingschool … now you have to do a degree to get anywhere. (Kate, female, history student)
54  M. Tomlinson Such sentiments are further reflected in what was ultimately viewed as being an inevitable and anticipated trajectory based on their existing cultural and educational biographies. All thesestudents, including those from less traditional backgrounds, talked about entering higher educa-tion ‘as being the next step’ and following a natural progression in their own learning trajectories.It was clear that these trajectories were informed by what Hodkinson, Sparkes and Hodkinson(1996) refer to as ‘pragmatically rational choices’: young people’s decisions around participationare largely informed by what are perceived to be available and immediate options and are closelybound up in their own learning biographies:  Coming to university just seemed the right thing to do, like I had achieved well up until that point and so you know that you are able to go … it was a case that at school it was fairly easy to go to A-levelsrather than look for a job, and then I was a good student so I was encouraged to go to University.(Robert, male, engineering student) It [going to university] was what everyone was doing at the time … like you go to school and then to sixth form and then on to university. You don’t really question it … it’s a sort of natural progression,and for a lot of people there are few reasons why you couldn’t go, apart from having to find a job orbeing put off by debt. (Ellen, female, media studies student) It is clear that this group of higher education students have internalised the dominant human capi- tal theory discourse. Such perceptions are likely to be reinforced by the inevitable financial costsand risks attached with higher education study. At the same time, these students were embarkingupon what they saw as an anticipated trajectory from school to university; one based not so muchon the raw acquisition of additional human capital that had a clear return value, but instead asocially patterned set of aspirations that frame what they come to view
return value, but instead asocially patterned set of aspirations that frame what they come to view as appropriate pathways. Positional competition and the weakening currency of higher education credentials As the above evidence shows, higher education students view their credentials as positional goods that provide advantages in the labour market; however, there was also widespread concern abouttheir limitations. Students view the relationship between their higher education credentials andtheir utility in the market as being far from straightforward. Accessing the types of employmentand labour market returns they were seeking was therefore viewed as not being reducible to theirhigher education credentials. Such concerns were derived from students’ perception of being inan intense competition for graduate forms of employment in what was perceived to be an increas-ingly tough-entry and congested graduate market: the labour market rewards that they hoped toaccess were seen to be in limited supply. A dominant concern amongst these students was that thesupply of graduates leaving mass higher education is exceeding the actual demand for graduatetalent. Consequently, all the students in the study took the view that they would not seamlesslyenter graduate jobs on the basis of simply possessing graduate-level credentials. While this variedsomewhat between students on the basis of the types of labour markets they were orientatingtowards, all expressed concerns about what they interpreted as the increasingly competitive and‘cut-throat’ market for graduate credentials:  It’s just all looks so competitive … like you hear about hundreds of applicants applying for one job. The impression I get is that there are too many people leaving university looking for too few jobs. It’squite depressing… like you’ve done a degree and you should be able to get the job you want, buteveryone is applying for the same things and competition is intense. (Jane, female, history student) It’s strange
for the same things and competition is intense. (Jane, female, history student) It’s strange when you think of it … like you’ve done your GCSEs, your A-levels and then your degree and you kind of expect to go into a job. But I just know that there is so much competition for places,and especially from the experiences I’ve heard from my friends. It’s made me realise that it isn’t aseasy as you’d like … it’s all become very competitive and cut-throat. (Ryan, male, economicsstudent)
British Journal of Sociology of Education  55 This sense of positional competition was especially keenly felt by students in highly subscribed and popular subjects where there was a large-scale supply of similarly qualified graduates seekingto enter high demand markets. As was anticipated by the following media studies student:  It’s slowly getting less and less [available graduate jobs] … I mean there are more and more graduates and less and less available jobs. I’d say that an area like Media and Journalism is one of the mostcompetitive markets for graduates. (Lyndsey, female) Such views, so prevalent in this study, appear to derive from students’ sense that, as gradu- ates, they would be positioned in relative  terms against other graduates with similar educational credentials and profiles. It was apparent that students do not view their employability as beingdetermined simply their by absolute  level of credentials and the skills and knowledge engendered by these. The evidence here instead points to students’ perception that the markers of theiremployability have changed, driven mainly by what they view as being an over-supply in gradu-ate talent leaving higher education. This situation left students with a somewhat confused senseof the value and worth of their credentials; in particular, the relationship between their merits ineducation and its reward in the labour market. As one biology student observed:  There are still people out there who think that because they have a degree that will enable them to do what they want, like they’ve got a degree and they will be set up for life … but from what I’veexperienced and seen through my brother and friends it’s not quite as simple as that … employers arebecoming ever more cut-throat about who they wish to recruit. (Oliver, male) Such concerns further framed how students came to view the value and currency of their higher education credentials for their future employability. Mass higher education was seen as
higher education credentials for their future employability. Mass higher education was seen as bringingabout an inflationary rise in formal credentials that had the ultimate effect of lowering their statusand exchange value in the labour market. With the growth in graduates leaving university, thesecredentials were seen to be commonplace and easier to attain. As a result of this, the students inthis study were concerned with what they saw as a lowering of their symbolic value. These creden-tials were no longer seen as providing a ‘badge of distinction’ or conferring upon graduates eliteor honorific status that marked them out as distinct. These views were further reinforced by agrowing sense that employers not able to distinguish between vast amounts of similarly qualifiedstudents. The views of the following business studies student reflect students’ concerns with thelack of distinction and status of higher education credentials in mass higher education.  There are so many people with degrees now that it is becoming difficult for employers to tell them apart … with so many people with degrees it means far less than it used to, like you are another personwho has gone through the conveyor belt. I’d say you were at advantage having one but it won’t beenough on its own to get you a job. (Hugh, male) Even amongst these high-achieving students, who were aware that they were at the elite end of the higher education market, there was still a sense that there would be similar competition forhighly sough-after graduate jobs. This sense of positional conflict is giving rise to genuineconcerns and anxieties around the limitations of so-called hard credentials in shaping labourmarket outcomes. The perceived need to add value and distinction to credentials The perceived importance of grades and institutional profileIn light of students’ concerns about positional competition, credential inflation and the declining currency of their hard credentials, the data also revealed a
credential inflation and the declining currency of their hard credentials, the data also revealed a concern amongst students about theneed to add value and distinction to these credentials, mainly as a way of ‘standing apart’ fromother graduates with similar profiles and achievements. Significantly, it is students’ perceived
56  M. Tomlinson need for credential distinction that appears to be influencing the types of rationalities they are developing around learning. There was a growing sense amongst students that they had to ‘do allthey could’ to give themselves a positional advantage in the labour market. This was typicallyexpressed in the importance they attached to grades, the profile of their institution and, in somecases, the extra human capital of postgraduate credentials, all of which were seen as a potentialmeans of achieving a positional advantage in the labour market. The issue of degree classification featured strongly in the way students looked to gain posi- tional advantage in the labour market. 1 Indeed, there was a tendency for them to see it as being potentially significant in shaping future labour market potential and outcomes. While there wasa tendency for students to view degree classification as a reflection of their future labour marketpotential, it was largely seen in terms of providing a positional advantage in the graduatemarket. Underpinning this was a perception that employers would use degree classification as ameans of discriminating between increasingly large numbers of graduates with similar academiccredentials. In their earlier work on studentship in elite French universities, Bourdieu and Passeron (1979) developed the notion of the ‘cult of the grade’ to describe the leisurely competition amongstprivileged students to pass their academic time. For the students in the present study, grades wereseen in a far more instrumental light; largely in terms of their positional value in the labour market– as the following views highlight:  It is extremely important [degree classification], just because you need to get a 2.1 to get a decent job and if you don’t you can’t apply for too many firms. I guess employers judge you by your examresults and I think the fact they look at it like that is important. It is important for the type of contractyou get, which types of
look at it like that is important. It is important for the type of contractyou get, which types of firms you apply for and what type of salary you get. (Yasmin, female, lawstudent) I think a 2.1 is okay and I generally think if I got lower than that I’d have failed. I do know people who graduated last year with not great results and they are now experiencing problems. (Ellen,female, history student) Such instrumental concerns over grade classification took clear primacy over more intrinsic values around self-development and ‘learning for its own sake’. The data revealed a dominantconcern among students around the ‘end outcome’ of their studies. This concern was perhapsreinforced by their sense that the disciplinary knowledge they acquired would have little, if no,direct transferability in the labour market, even for student in more ‘vocational’ subjects.Students’ strong emphasis on the explicit and tangible outcomes of their study reflects theincreasing instrumental rationality in their values around higher education. This appeared toframe how students appraised the value and, in many ways, the purpose of their learning. Suchperceptions are likely to be reinforced by the growing marketisation and changing financiallandscape of higher education (Naidoo 2003), generated by new fee arrangements, as much asgrowing competitive pressures in the graduate market. As one law student bluntly observed:  I really can’t see why people bother coming to university if they don’t get a 2.1 or above. Anything below that is not going to get you anywhere … like what sort of employer is going to even bothconsidering a student with a Third. (Frances, female) Such views are further echoed in the views of one male history student who, at the time of the interview, was approaching his final-year examinations. It was clear from his accounts that hewas equating the value of his higher education credential, and the wider experience around it,with its end outcome as measured by the grade:  My
credential, and the wider experience around it,with its end outcome as measured by the grade:  My main motivation has really been to get the best grades I can. Yes, I’ve enjoyed the experience and everything, but now it’s a case of doing all I can to achieve my main goal which is a good grade. Iwill be totally gutted if I got lower than a 2.1. (Ralph, male, business studies student)
British Journal of Sociology of Education  57 The salient issue of fees is likely to reinforce students’ concern about positioning their higher education learning towards discreet ends, namely that of the labour market. Further, it was clearfrom students’ responses that they were keen to capitalise upon the institutional profile and statusof their university as a way of gaining a positional advantage in the labour market. The studentsin this study expressed a keen awareness of what they saw as being different levels of culturalcapital and field positioning of higher education institutions in the context of mass higher educa-tion. They anticipated that the institutional capital (Bourdieu 1988) associated with graduatingfrom a more elite university would position them more favourably when attempting to enter theelite end of the market. Clearly reflected in their views was a sense of inequality betweengraduates leaving universities: the move towards mass higher education was seen to reinforcerather than neutralised positional difference between groups of graduates. The notion of the‘right’ or ‘good’ type of university was seen as having a significant bearing upon future labourmarket outcomes, even in higher demand areas such as Engineering:  I do think it is important that you attend the ‘right’ university. I know that for many high-level jobs there is going to be intense competition … so that is why I think it is important to come to a gooduniversity like this because employers will know you’ve got a good degree. (Jon, male, engineeringstudent) As in the case of degree classification, students viewed employers as discriminating between different types of graduates leaving mass higher education. While these students acknowledgedthat the learning experiences of graduates from ‘new’ institutions might actually been more rele-vant to the world of work, this was off-set by a clear sense that employers harboured a deep-seatedbias towards students with traditional academic
a clear sense that employers harboured a deep-seatedbias towards students with traditional academic profiles. This was anticipated as a reality thatwould advantage (or disadvantage) different groups of graduates. The perceived importance of soft credentials Whilst, as the above evidence clearly suggests, adding value to formal credentials is seen as an important issue of their employability, there was also a very strong sense among these studentsfor the need to develop and deploy credentials that fell outside their formal learning. A strongemphasis was placed upon what can be termed soft credentials.  This was built upon a prevalent view that their graduateness, or potential as graduates, was no longer represented through theirformal achievements in higher education. A heavy emphasis instead was placed upon the need todevelop a narrative of employability that encompassed experiences and achievement outside oftheir degrees. The evidence suggests that higher education students are using the discourse ofexperience or, what Brown and Hesketh (2004) term the ‘economy of experience’, in understand-ing their future employability and labour market outcomes. Such narratives therefore not onlyinvolve formal educational achievements, but also the development of extra-curricula activitiesand skills. These were further viewed as having potential utility value in the graduate market. A dominant concern among the students in this study was that of trying to package these soft credentials in ways that conveyed the potential calibre of them as individual graduates. In linewith their concerns about the growing homogenisation of hard credentials, students looked uponthe Curriculum Vitae as an important tool for projecting a narrative of individual potential,competence and skill. This was seen as being particularly important during early stages of labourmarket entry such as the application and recruitment process. As the following male engineeringand English students argue, the
and recruitment process. As the following male engineeringand English students argue, the anticipated need to project individualised attributes and achieve-ment is typically seen as a way for graduates to distinguish themselves in a congested market:  I think it’s now becoming based upon simply what you have done outside your degree and what your experiences are. I think this is because everyone now seems to have a degree it doesn’t say a lot aboutthe individual. (Wayne, male, engineering student)
58  M. Tomlinson I think employers attempt to engage with the person, like in terms of what they have done, Employers will want to get a much bigger picture of the student other than their degree. This is meaning less andless these days. (Adrian, male, English student) The students interviewed in this study were therefore concerned with teasing out the potential market value of these experiences. Whilst these activities often formed a part of students’ lifestyleactivities, they were also seen as potentially adding to their ‘marketability’ as graduates. Theywere viewed as a means of conveying added-value skills and competences. This again relatesback to students’ understanding of the degree in itself being a blunt instrument in the labourmarket. As the views of the following female engineering student suggest, students appear awareof employers’ growing emphasis on personal and behavioural attributes of graduates, and not justskills and knowledge contained within what she views as the rigid structure of the degree:  I think the degree tells half the story – a lot more of it is to do with what you have done outside your degree, like what sport you’re in to and what societies you are involved in. I think the degree is a veryforced structure whereby people are forced to go along with the system. So I think employers arelooking for evidence of initiative and motivation in what graduates have done aside from theirdegrees. (Lisa, female, engineering student) These more personal, social and behavioural credentials were seen as being particularly important in the recruitment stage where employers would be assessing graduates’ ‘live attributes’.Crucially, students increasingly viewed their employability as matter of ‘what they are about’ asindividuals, as much as their technical know-how and cognitive skills. In the case of highlycompetitive and tough-entry jobs, the issue of ‘social fit’ between individual graduates andemployers was seen to be significant in shaping their
‘social fit’ between individual graduates andemployers was seen to be significant in shaping their outcomes. Such perceptions again reinforcestudents’ concerns about the limitation of hard educational credentials in accessing desired formsof employment, as the views of two female business and economics students highlight:  I think you’ve got to show that you have a good personality – basically that you’re an all rounder who doesn’t focus one area … a lot of it is how you come across as a person and what sort of personalityyou project, as well as things like appearance and dress. Much of it depends on how well they feelyou fit into the company and so a lot of it is about the impression you make. (Julie, female, businessstudent) The personality of the candidate is definitely going to make a difference because people whop are hiring you will be interested to see if you will be able to fit into the firm and that you can work to theparticular culture they have … a lot of it is about marketing yourself. (Marie, female, economicsstudent) Discussion and conclusion The present study has highlighted the various tensions and concerns experienced by higher educa- tion students around the role and utility of their higher education credentials in shaping theirfuture labour market outcomes. It has also shown some of the contradictions in students’ under-standing of the potential currency of their university qualifications. It is clear that students stillview higher education credentials as positioning them favourably in what is seen as a hierarchicallabour market. These credentials are seen as providing added human and cultural capital to openup employment opportunities that would otherwise be limited. To this extent, students appear tohave internalised the dominant view of ‘education as a return’ so prevalent in current highereducation policy. However, this study has also highlighted serious limitations in the human capital framework that continues to exert much influence on
serious limitations in the human capital framework that continues to exert much influence on current higher education policy (DfES 2003, 2004). Theframework has been exposed as an unreliable tool for understanding the concept of employability,as well as the relationship between educational credentials and labour market outcomes. The
British Journal of Sociology of Education  59 evidence clearly shows that students understand their future labour market outcomes as being more complex than simply possessing extra credentials and technical knowledge from highereducation. Ultimately, higher education students view themselves to be in a positional competi-tion amongst a growing supply of graduates entering the labour market with similar profiles andaspirations. The task facing students is that of gaining a positional advantage in a competitivelabour market where employers are placing increasingly less emphasis on academic credentials(Brown and Hesketh 2004). This study has highlighted how higher education students are ratio-nalising this problem and some of the strategies they are adopting as a response. The increasinglyinstrumental values and attitudes highlighted in this study appear to be a response to anticipatedcompetitive pressures in the labour market, as well as growing financial burdens experiencedduring and after graduation. It is clear that higher education students see the need to add value totheir credentials in light of their weakening currency. Increasingly, students are attaching growingimportance to so-called ‘soft’ currencies; they appear to be increasingly couching their employ-ability around personal and social credentials, and are attempting to make these fit into thechanging demands of employers. A limitation of this study is its limited sample of students, confined to a high-status university comprising relatively privileged, middle-class, high-achieving young people. However, thetensions explicit in their views highlight many significant tensions being played out by theseyoung people in pursuit of labour market rewards. They may be further mirroring wider culturaltensions among the expanding middle class who are finding it increasingly difficult to subscribeto traditional notions of merit as a way of winning positional advantage (Ball 2002; Brown andHesketh 2004). The study
of merit as a way of winning positional advantage (Ball 2002; Brown andHesketh 2004). The study also raises some serious issues around equality and social exclusion inthe graduate labour market. The expansion of higher education has been welcomed in manyquarters. The advantages of mass higher education have been framed in terms of both economicefficiency and social justice. The students in the present study were clearly aware that the role ofuniversities in reproducing occupational rewards is changing. It is clear that, even among studentswith similar educational and cultural profiles, not all will achieve equal labour market returns(Power et al. 2003). At the same time, these students are able to draw upon various cultural andeducational advantages. Moreover, they are more able to access the types of ‘experiences’ thatadd value to their credentials, as well as the social and personal skills increasingly being valuedby employers in the elite end of the market. A further issue relates to the changing role of universities in terms of processes of wider social and economic reproduction, a role that has continued to change shape since the time of Bourdieuand Passeron’s study into studentship (Boudieu and Passeron 1979). The expanded and unifiedsystem of higher education may, at one level, be blurring social divisions in the acquisition ofsymbolic and economic goods used to maximise individuals’ positions in the economic field.However, this may mask the fact that elite and mass higher education often co-exist (Scott 1995),and that this co-existence is likely to intensify positional difference and the levels of symboliccapital amongst different graduates. Inequalities in symbolic power and capital rest uneasily withnot only policy-makers’ attempts to couch the expansion of higher education in neutral, merito-cratic terms, but also with more optimistic visions of the universities as potential sites of personaland cognitive transformation which transcend learners’
universities as potential sites of personaland cognitive transformation which transcend learners’ pre-existing cultural habitus (Barnett1996). Mass higher education encompasses an increasingly larger body of students who have tradi- tionally been positioned outside the graduate labour market. The views, experiences and culturaltensions of these types of students are now well documented (Leathwood and O’ Connell 2003;Reay, David and Ball 2006). While higher education might offer some of these students anemancipating hand – both culturally and economically – many continue to be excluded from labour market opportunity structures. The associated risks of participating in higher education for
60  M. Tomlinson these students are also considerably higher than for those positioned more strongly in the higher education and labour market field (Archer and Hutchings 2000). The evidence clearly shows thatemployers play an active role in reinforcing patterns of labour market inequality amongstdifferent graduates (Harvey, Moon and Geall 1997; Brown and Hesketh 2004). The expansion ofmass higher education, together with the corresponding decline in the value of academic creden-tials for labour market returns, is likely to reinforce these inequalities. Note 1. The majority of UK bachelors’ degrees are divided into firsts, upper seconds (2.1), lower seconds (2.2), thirds and passes without honours. Figures from the UK’s Higher Education Statistics Agency show thatin 2006 the percentage of UK first-degree graduates attaining a 2.1 classification was 45%, comparedwith 30% gaining 2.2 degrees, 11% with firsts and 7% with thirds or passes. Many UK graduateemployers specify a 2.1 (or above) as a desirable, sometimes pre-requisite, entry requirement. References Abell, P. 1991.  Rational choice theory.  Aldershot: Brockfield. Archer, L., and M. Hutchings. 2000. ‘Bettering yourself’?: Discourses of risk, cost and benefit in ethnically diverse, young, working class non-participants’ construction of higher education.  British Journal of Sociology of Education  22, no. 4: 555–75. Ashton. D.N., and F. Green. 1996.  Education, training and the global economy.  Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. Ball, S.J. 2002.  Class strategies and the education market: The middle classes and social advantage. London: Routledge Falmer. Barnett, R. 1996. Being and becoming’: A student trajectory.  International Journal of Lifelong Learning 15, no. 2: 72–84. Battu, H., C. Belfield, and P. Sloane. 2000. How can we measure graduate over-education and its effects? National Institute of Economic Review  171: 82–93. Becker, G.S. 1993.  Human capital: Theoretical and empirical analysis with special reference to
Becker, G.S. 1993.  Human capital: Theoretical and empirical analysis with special reference to education. 3rd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Bell, D. 1973.  The coming of the post-industrial society: A venture in social forecasting.  New York: Basic Books. Bourdieu, P. 1988.  Homo academicus.  Cambridge: Polity Press. Bourdieu, P., and J.C. Passeron. 1979.  The inheritors: French students and their relation with culture. Chicago: Chicago University Press. Brown, P. 2000. The globalisation of positional competition.  Sociology  34, no. 4: 633–53. Brown, P., and A.J. Hesketh. 2004.  The mismanagement of talent: Employability and jobs in the knowledge economy.  Oxford: Oxford University Press. Brynin, M. 2002. Overqualification in employment.  Work, Employment and Society  16, no. 4: 637–54. Castells, M. 1994. The university system: Engine of development in the new world economy. In  Revitalising higher education,  ed. J. Salmi and A.M. Verspoor, 14–40. Oxford: Pergamon. Collins, R. 1979.  The credential society: An historical sociology of education and stratification.  New York: Academic Press. Department for Education and Skills. 2003.  The future of higher education.  London: HMSO. ———. 2004.  The higher education act.  London: HMSO. Fevre, R., G. Rees, and S. Gorard. 1999. Some sociological alternatives to human capital theory and their implications for research on post-compulsory education and training.  Journal of Education and Work 12, no. 2: 117–40. Harvey, L., S. Moon, and V. Geall. 1997.  Graduates’ work: Organisational change and students’ attributes.  Birmingham: QHE. Hirsch, F. 1977.  The social limits to growth.  London: Routledge. Hodkinson, P., A. Sparkes, and H. Hodkinson. 1996.  Triumphs and tears: Young people, markets and the transition from school to work.  London: David Fulton. Keep, E., and K. Mayhew. 2004. The economic and distributional implications of current policies on higher education.  Oxford Review of Economic Policy  20, no.
implications of current policies on higher education.  Oxford Review of Economic Policy  20, no. 2: 298–314.
British Journal of Sociology of Education  61 Leathwood, C., and P. O’Connell. 2003. ‘It’s a struggle’: The construction of the ‘new student’ in higher education.  Journal of Education Policy  18, no. 6: 597–615. Mason, G. 2002. High skills utilisation under mass higher education: Graduate employment in service industries in Britain.  Journal of Education and Work  15, no. 4: 427–56. Moreau, M.P., and C. Leathwood. 2006. Balancing paid work and studies: Working (-class) students in higher education.  Studies in Higher Education  31, no. 1: 23–42. Naidoo, R. 2003. Repositioning higher education as a global commodity: Opportunities for future sociol- ogy of education work.  British Journal of Sociology of Education  24, no. 2: 249–59. Organisation for Economic Development and Cooperation. 2003.  Education at a glance.  Paris: OECD. Power, S., T. Edwards, G. Whitty, and V. Wigfall. 2003.  Education and the middle classes.  Buckingham: Open University Press. Reay, D., M.E. David, and S.J. Ball. 2006.  Degrees of choice: Social class, race and gender in higher education.  Stoke on Trent: Trentham Books. Schuller, T., S. Baron, and J. Field. 2000.  Social capital: Critical perspectives.  Oxford: Oxford University Press. Schultz, T.W. 1961.  Investment in human capital.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Scott, P. 1995.  The meanings of mass higher education.  Buckingham: Open University Press. Thurow, L.C. 1977. Education and economic equality. In  Power and ideology in education,  ed. J. Karabel and A.H. Halsey, 325–35. New York: Oxford University Press. Weber, M. 1948.  From Max Weber: Essays in sociology.  Trans., ed. and intro. H.H. Gerth and C.W. Mills. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cbse20 British Journal of Sociology of Education ISSN: 0142-5692 (Print) 1465-3346 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/cbse20 ‘The degree is not enough ’: students ’ perceptions of the role of higher education credentials for graduate work and employability Michael Tomlinson To cite this article:  Michael Tomlinson (2008) ‘The degree is not enough ’: students ’ perceptions of the role of higher education credentials for graduate work and employability, British Journal of Sociology of Education, 29:1, 49-61, DOI: 10.1080/01425690701737457 To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/01425690701737457 Published online: 11 Jan 2008. Submit your article to this journal  Article views: 27383 View related articles  Citing articles: 124 View citing articles --- British Journal of Sociology of Education Vol. 29, No. 1, January 2008, 49–61 ISSN 0142-5692 print/ISSN 1465-3346 online © 2008 Taylor & FrancisDOI: 10.1080/01425690701737457http://www.informaworld.com ‘The degree is not enough’: students’ perceptions of the role of higher  education credentials for graduate work and employability Michael Tomlinson* Cardiff Business School, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK Taylor and FrancisCBSE_A_273688.sgm(Received 14 August 2006; final version received 26 June 2007 ) 10.1080/01425690701737457British Journal of Sociology of Education0142-5692 (print)/1465-3346 (online)Original Article2008Taylor & Francis291000000January 2008MichaelTomlinsontomlinsonmb1@cardiff.ac.uk; tomlinsonmb1@cf.ac.ukThe UK Government is calling upon higher education students to see their learning as an investment that will give them direct benefits in the labour market. At the same time, therelationship between educational credentials and their returns in labour market has beenchanging in recent times. Based on a qualitative study with 53 final-year undergraduatestudents in a pre-1992 university, this article examines the way higher education studentsunderstand the role of their educational credentials in relation to their future employability. Itshows that students perceive their academic qualifications as having a declining role in shapingtheir employment outcomes in what is perceived to be a congested and competitive graduatelabour market. While academic credentials are still seen as a significant dimension of theiremployability, students increasingly see the need to add value to them in order to gain anadvantage in the labour market. Keywords: mass higher education; graduate employability; human capital; credentials;  positional competition Introduction The UK Government continues to emphasise the importance of higher education credentials, at both a social and individual level. Higher education credentials have been presented as crucial foreconomic
and individual level. Higher education credentials have been presented as crucial foreconomic development, particularly in meeting the changing needs of the knowledge-driven econ-omy (Bell 1973; Castells 1994). They are also seen as a way of providing individuals with accessto opportunities in the labour market (Department for Education and Skills [DfES] 2003). Withthe advent of course fees in the late 1990s and the more recent introduction of variable tuition feesfollowing the 2004 Higher Education Act (DfES 2004), students are bearing significantly morecosts towards their participation in higher education. These costs have typically been justified bypolicy-makers on the grounds that graduates experience significant financial and personal benefitsfrom participating in higher education. Thus, in the words of the DfES White Paper:  Graduates and those who have ‘sub-degree’ qualifications earn, on average, around 50 per cent more than non-graduates … and, as a group they have enjoyed double the number of job promotions overthe past five years. (DfES 2003, para 5.5, 59) There are two main competing interpretations of the relationship between higher education credentials and labour market outcomes. The first is the human capital, or technocratic, interpre-tation. The second is the positional conflict, or credentialist, interpretation. Both posit markedlydifferent understandings about the role of higher education credentials as a source of economicgrowth, and the role of credentials in individual employability and labour market outcomes. *Email: tomlinsonmb1@cf.ac.uk
50  M. Tomlinson Higher education policy has been largely built around some of the main conceptual and empirical ideas of human capital theory (Shultz 1961; Becker 1993). Underpinning the humancapital model is the idea of a clear, direct and linear relationship between the expansion of educa-tional credentials and economic development. At a more detailed level, human capital theoryviews participation in education and training as an investment that yields both social and privatereturns (Ashton and Green 1996). The social benefits manifest themselves in the form of a highlyskilled, flexible workforce as reflected in levels of national economic output (Organisation forEconomic Development and Cooperation 2003). The private returns are reflected in higherindividual earnings over time, as well as better career progression opportunities and wider labourmarket scope. Indeed, one of the primary justifications of the recent introduction of variable top-up fees has been the clear positional advantage that investment in higher education brings forindividual graduates, as evidenced in the so-called ‘graduate premium’, which they can expect toreceive when they enter the job market (DfES 2004). Higher education is therefore seen to be ashared investment between the individual graduates and the state, with both clearly benefitingfrom continued expansion. The theory also stipulates that people’s decisions around participation in education and training operate at a micro and highly individualised level, based ultimately on the principles ofrational choice (Abell 1991). Individuals, so the theory goes, make autonomous, careful anddeliberate choices, weighing up the perceived benefits of participation against the perceivedcosts. Driving these decisions is a utilitarian and self-optimising pursuit towards maximisingone’s labour market potential. The assumptions that underlie the human capital and rational choice model are in direct contrast to the positional conflict and credentialist
and rational choice model are in direct contrast to the positional conflict and credentialist interpretation of the relationship betweeneducational credentials and employment (Collins 1979; Hirsch 1977; Brown 2000). Positionalconflict approaches have been influenced largely by Weberian notions of power and monopoly;in particular, the way in which social groups use credentials to mobilise cultural and economicadvantage (Weber 1948). Exponents of the credentialist model argue that the rise in credentialsin no way reflects a genuine economic demand for more highly qualified labour, so oftenpresented in recent government policy. Authors such as Collins and Hirsch argue that the spreadof educational credentials is adding little or no value to individuals’ human capital. They furtherargue that the expansion of higher education, and concordant growth in credentials, has corre-sponded with the expansion of the middle classes, generating growing pressures for individualsto acquire further credentials to access jobs. Instead of reflecting an increase in the skills andknowledge demands needed to do jobs,  the upsurge in higher education credentials simply means that the stakes have been raised for what is needed to get jobs . Recent research has brought into question the link between graduate supply and economic growth, and has challenged the supply-side focus of much policy thinking on higher educationexpansion (Mason 2002; Keep and Mayhew 2004). This research has questioned the economicdemand for the increasing supply of graduates and the capacity of the labour market to accom-modate the upsurge in graduate credentials. There is further evidence to suggest that an increasingamount of graduates are overqualified for the types of employment they attain (Battu, Belfieldand Sloane 2000; Brynin 2002). One conclusion to be drawn from these studies is that growingnumbers of graduates are increasingly colonising areas of the labour market that were once occu-pied by non-graduates, --- are increasingly colonising areas of the labour market that were once occu-pied by non-graduates, leading to a potential mismatch between their level of qualification andits market utility. Such evidence therefore brings into question the importance of a universitydegree for the skill requirements of many graduate-level jobs. The credentialist model further highlights the conflict, power play and positional differences among individuals, both between and within the middle classes. A key issue here is the way in which individuals use, or attempt to use, various cultural resources and mobilise forms of
British Journal of Sociology of Education  51 capital – economic, social and cultural – for the return of labour market outcomes (Schuller, Baron and Field 2000). As Brown (2000) argues, the middle classes have traditionally been ableto establish a positional advantage in the labour market, largely through the use of wider educa-tional and cultural resources. Historically, higher education credentials, particularly those thatdenoted elite status, have been used to reproduce class advantage and provide access to labourmarket outcomes. The graduateness  associated with higher education credentials has tradition- ally served as a ‘status confirmation’ for the middle (and aspiring middle) classes, legitimisingeducational and occupational advantage. However, with the expansion of the middle classes, theshift towards mass higher education as well as changing notions of graduate skills and compe-tence, there has been a decline and status of these credentials. This is consequently bringingabout tension and anxiety amongst the middle classes who have to find new ways of winning apositional advantage in an increasingly competitive labour market. Recent evidence has shown that these types of tensions are being played out in graduates’ early experiences of the job market. In their study of graduate recruitment, Brown and Hesketh(2004) have shown the declining importance employers are attaching to academic credentials,and the increasing importance instead given to personal attributes and skills. Graduates may bevalued for their cognitive abilities and academic knowledge, yet the discourse of graduateemployability appears to be moving away from credentials that are merely a ‘tick in the box’.Their study shows that employers are increasingly defining employability more around notionsof ‘behavioural competence’ and the capacity for graduates to demonstrate and deploy a widerrange of range of personal, peformative and organisational abilities. While this in part may reflectthe
of range of personal, peformative and organisational abilities. While this in part may reflectthe changing organisational demands of many graduate employers, it may also be a means oflegitimising recruitment decisions when large numbers of graduates with similar educationalprofiles are competing for highly sought-after employment. Ultimately, the stakes for graduateemployment appear to have risen and the markers changed. This may be leading to tensions andchallenges for graduates seeking to capitalise upon their participation in higher education, and thecredentials they achieve from it, for their future work and employability. Focus of study and methods This research focuses on the way higher education students understand and interpret the role of their higher education credentials in shaping their future outcomes in the labour market in thecontext of these wider changes. This article draws upon research that has examined the way inwhich higher education students, on the verge of making the transition into the labour market,understand their future work and employability. One particular focus was on higher educationstudents’ perceptions of the utility of their higher education credentials, as well as its perceivedand anticipated role in opening up opportunities in the labour market. This focus is based princi-pally around the main research question: How do higher education students view the role of theirdegree credentials in shaping future employment prospects? In addressing this question, we notonly seek to explore students’ constructions of changes in higher education and the graduatelabour market, but also how they come to rationalise the role of their higher education credentialsfor future labour market return. Moreover, we will be able to examine the various theoretical posi-tions outlined in the introduction to this article that have aimed to explain the relationshipbetween educational credentials and labour market returns. Thus, to what extent do students --- educational credentials and labour market returns. Thus, to what extent do students viewtheir higher education credential as crucial a development in their human capital that will yieldclear and financially rewarding returns? To what extent do they view their pursuit for labourmarket returns as involving a positional competition between graduates? The study drew upon semi-structured interviews with 53 final-year undergraduates in a pre- 1992 UK university, and the sample included a roughly equal gender mix (28 females and
52  M. Tomlinson 25 males). Students were drawn equally from a range of subject disciplines under the four main categories of social sciences (sociology, education, social policy), arts/humanities (Englishliterature and history), physical sciences (biological sciences and chemistry) and vocational(engineering, law business studies, media studies). Owing to the social composition of the univer-sity from where these students were drawn, the overwhelming majority were from middle-classprofessional backgrounds. Only three students could be classed as coming from occupationalgroups v–vi, whereby both parents were in low-skilled, manual work, and only two students werefrom ethnic minority backgrounds. Although this sample is limited to one particular institution,the experiences of ‘traditional’ students have been largely under-investigated, and so these dataadd to recent research on students and graduates from less traditional backgrounds in newerhigher education institutions (Moreau and Leathwood 2006; Reay, David and Ball 2006). More-over, while the absolute growth in participation of non-traditional students has risen, studentsfrom professional middle-class backgrounds continue to be the most representative participants(and potential beneficiaries) of higher education (DfES 2003). Relating higher education credentials to future labour market outcomes The first clear finding to emerge from the data was the importance students ascribe to their higher education credentials for their future labour market outcomes. It was clear from their responsesthat they viewed the acquisition of higher education qualifications as a significant boost to theirlevel of human capital, which would provide them with advantages in the labour market. To thisextent, their higher education credentials were seen as positional goods and a key dimension oftheir future employability. Strongly implicit in students’ views was the sense that highereducation qualifications would open up a wider range of --- British Journal of Sociology of Education  57 The salient issue of fees is likely to reinforce students’ concern about positioning their higher education learning towards discreet ends, namely that of the labour market. Further, it was clearfrom students’ responses that they were keen to capitalise upon the institutional profile and statusof their university as a way of gaining a positional advantage in the labour market. The studentsin this study expressed a keen awareness of what they saw as being different levels of culturalcapital and field positioning of higher education institutions in the context of mass higher educa-tion. They anticipated that the institutional capital (Bourdieu 1988) associated with graduatingfrom a more elite university would position them more favourably when attempting to enter theelite end of the market. Clearly reflected in their views was a sense of inequality betweengraduates leaving universities: the move towards mass higher education was seen to reinforcerather than neutralised positional difference between groups of graduates. The notion of the‘right’ or ‘good’ type of university was seen as having a significant bearing upon future labourmarket outcomes, even in higher demand areas such as Engineering:  I do think it is important that you attend the ‘right’ university. I know that for many high-level jobs there is going to be intense competition … so that is why I think it is important to come to a gooduniversity like this because employers will know you’ve got a good degree. (Jon, male, engineeringstudent) As in the case of degree classification, students viewed employers as discriminating between different types of graduates leaving mass higher education. While these students acknowledgedthat the learning experiences of graduates from ‘new’ institutions might actually been more rele-vant to the world of work, this was off-set by a clear sense that employers harboured a deep-seatedbias towards students with traditional academic
in students’ views was the sense that highereducation qualifications would open up a wider range of economic, occupational and socialopportunities that might otherwise be limited. In many ways, students were quick to differentiatebetween graduate and non-graduate credentials and the different opportunity structures associ-ated with both – as was anticipated by this economics student:  I think graduates get a lot more special treatment compared to the rest of people looking for jobs. If you go to these firms’ websites there’s nearly always a section there for graduates, other than thatthere’s just a general section… from what I understand at the moment firms are recruiting lessgraduates than in previous years, but with the larger firms a lot of the focus is definitely placed ongraduates. (Oliver, male) Indeed, the students in this study appeared to have internalised the wider discourse of the ‘graduate as higher earner’ so dominant in much of the policy discourse on higher education fund-ing and expansion. There was a tendency, therefore, to make a distinction between those whopossessed formal higher education credentials and those who did not in terms their ability toaccess various opportunity structures in the labour market. These perceptions are typified in theviews of the following biological sciences student who anticipated that:  In terms of getting a job it’s very much a case of those who have got a degree and those who haven’t. I think the days where people started off in a company and worked their way up are very much a thingof the past … it’s definitely worth doing a degree to make yourself more employable. (Gareth, male) It appears that much of the value students attach to their degree credentials is derived from their anticipated role in opening up labour market opportunities and providing them withpositional advantages. The data in this study point to a widespread perception among students thattheir higher education credentials are vital commodities in
perception among students thattheir higher education credentials are vital commodities in the pursuit of relatively well-paid,high-status and rewarding forms of graduate employment. Indeed, as one social science studentanticipated, such opportunities might not otherwise be available had she chosen not to participatein higher education: --- British Journal of Sociology of Education  53 I think that if you don’t have a degree you get to a certain point where you can’t get any higher because everybody above you has a degree, so I guess you have to be unique to do that without one,but it would be very difficult. So I mean, that was very much with me when I was applying touniversity … like what would I end up without a degree? (Christine, female) The notion of the higher education credential as a positional good clearly resonates with these students. It is clear that they have anticipated what they perceive to be substantial opportunitycosts associated with non-participation. However, reading between students’ accounts, it is alsoclear that their perceptions of their credentials do not necessarily conform to the human capitaland rational choice framework outlined earlier. It would appear that the notion of highereducation as an ‘investment’ does not adequately capture students’ own sense of why they areparticipating in higher education. A distinction has been outlined by Fevre, Rees and Gorard(1999) between participation in post-compulsory education based on crude investment and thatbased on the perceived positional and consumptive value of credentials. They argue that youngpeople’s decisions around participating in further levels of education are based on the latter, interms of what they call instrumental credentialism.  Educational credentials are primarily pursued because of their perceived positional value and advantages in providing access to employment.This is likely to be the case even though they might not have any direct, immediate or transferablevalue in the labour market. For students who had a limited sense of how they might be able toapply their credentials, this gave rise to little more than a vague sense that it would ‘lead tosomething’. As the following history student remarked:  One of the main reasons I chose to enter university was because of the degree and what it can offer me for the
main reasons I chose to enter university was because of the degree and what it can offer me for the future. You do hear of all these horror stories of graduate working in Burger King orwhatever … but I do think that it will help in the long run, like it will benefit me and give me an edgeover someone who didn’t go to university. (Alison, female) Such views further relate to what was a widespread perception of external pressures placed upon young people to invest in higher education in order to maximise their chances in thecompetition for jobs. There was a strong sense amongst the students in the study of being caughtup in inflation of credentials that would increasingly be needed as a means for ‘staying ahead’ inthe job market. It was evident that students were just as likely to view their participation inhigher education as a ‘defensive expenditure’ (Thurow 1977) and a way of avoiding the other-wise negative labour market consequences of not possessing them. There was strong evidenceof students’ sense of the limitations of not acquiring higher education qualification and ofpotentially negating future opportunities. This is reflected in the views of Tony and Kate, bothof whom were clearly aware that their decisions around participating in higher education wereheavily bounded by wider educational and labour market milieu that framed what they saw asbeing appropriate choices. Even though Tony had a clear set of aims for his career prior toembarking upon higher education, these were offset by concerns about the limited alternativelabour market options:  Well there was very little choice other than to come to university quite frankly. It seemed the only thing to do. I also had a sense that I would probably end up stacking shelves otherwise … so I alwaysknew that if I wanted to do something worthwhile I would need a degree. (Tony, male, engineeringstudent) In Kate’s case, her views on higher education and its potential relationship with future labour market trajectory --- her views on higher education and its potential relationship with future labour market trajectory appeared to be informed by a strong sense of restricted alternative options toparticipating in higher education:  It was either to come to university or work in some random office job for the rest of my life. It does seem to have changed a bit, like previously you might have been able to get a decent job on leavingschool … now you have to do a degree to get anywhere. (Kate, female, history student)
54  M. Tomlinson Such sentiments are further reflected in what was ultimately viewed as being an inevitable and anticipated trajectory based on their existing cultural and educational biographies. All thesestudents, including those from less traditional backgrounds, talked about entering higher educa-tion ‘as being the next step’ and following a natural progression in their own learning trajectories.It was clear that these trajectories were informed by what Hodkinson, Sparkes and Hodkinson(1996) refer to as ‘pragmatically rational choices’: young people’s decisions around participationare largely informed by what are perceived to be available and immediate options and are closelybound up in their own learning biographies:  Coming to university just seemed the right thing to do, like I had achieved well up until that point and so you know that you are able to go … it was a case that at school it was fairly easy to go to A-levelsrather than look for a job, and then I was a good student so I was encouraged to go to University.(Robert, male, engineering student) It [going to university] was what everyone was doing at the time … like you go to school and then to sixth form and then on to university. You don’t really question it … it’s a sort of natural progression,and for a lot of people there are few reasons why you couldn’t go, apart from having to find a job orbeing put off by debt. (Ellen, female, media studies student) It is clear that this group of higher education students have internalised the dominant human capi- tal theory discourse. Such perceptions are likely to be reinforced by the inevitable financial costsand risks attached with higher education study. At the same time, these students were embarkingupon what they saw as an anticipated trajectory from school to university; one based not so muchon the raw acquisition of additional human capital that had a clear return value, but instead asocially patterned set of aspirations that frame what they come to view
return value, but instead asocially patterned set of aspirations that frame what they come to view as appropriate pathways. Positional competition and the weakening currency of higher education credentials As the above evidence shows, higher education students view their credentials as positional goods that provide advantages in the labour market; however, there was also widespread concern abouttheir limitations. Students view the relationship between their higher education credentials andtheir utility in the market as being far from straightforward. Accessing the types of employmentand labour market returns they were seeking was therefore viewed as not being reducible to theirhigher education credentials. Such concerns were derived from students’ perception of being inan intense competition for graduate forms of employment in what was perceived to be an increas-ingly tough-entry and congested graduate market: the labour market rewards that they hoped toaccess were seen to be in limited supply. A dominant concern amongst these students was that thesupply of graduates leaving mass higher education is exceeding the actual demand for graduatetalent. Consequently, all the students in the study took the view that they would not seamlesslyenter graduate jobs on the basis of simply possessing graduate-level credentials. While this variedsomewhat between students on the basis of the types of labour markets they were orientatingtowards, all expressed concerns about what they interpreted as the increasingly competitive and‘cut-throat’ market for graduate credentials:  It’s just all looks so competitive … like you hear about hundreds of applicants applying for one job. The impression I get is that there are too many people leaving university looking for too few jobs. It’squite depressing… like you’ve done a degree and you should be able to get the job you want, buteveryone is applying for the same things and competition is intense. (Jane, female, history student) It’s strange --- for the same things and competition is intense. (Jane, female, history student) It’s strange when you think of it … like you’ve done your GCSEs, your A-levels and then your degree and you kind of expect to go into a job. But I just know that there is so much competition for places,and especially from the experiences I’ve heard from my friends. It’s made me realise that it isn’t aseasy as you’d like … it’s all become very competitive and cut-throat. (Ryan, male, economicsstudent)
British Journal of Sociology of Education  55 This sense of positional competition was especially keenly felt by students in highly subscribed and popular subjects where there was a large-scale supply of similarly qualified graduates seekingto enter high demand markets. As was anticipated by the following media studies student:  It’s slowly getting less and less [available graduate jobs] … I mean there are more and more graduates and less and less available jobs. I’d say that an area like Media and Journalism is one of the mostcompetitive markets for graduates. (Lyndsey, female) Such views, so prevalent in this study, appear to derive from students’ sense that, as gradu- ates, they would be positioned in relative  terms against other graduates with similar educational credentials and profiles. It was apparent that students do not view their employability as beingdetermined simply their by absolute  level of credentials and the skills and knowledge engendered by these. The evidence here instead points to students’ perception that the markers of theiremployability have changed, driven mainly by what they view as being an over-supply in gradu-ate talent leaving higher education. This situation left students with a somewhat confused senseof the value and worth of their credentials; in particular, the relationship between their merits ineducation and its reward in the labour market. As one biology student observed:  There are still people out there who think that because they have a degree that will enable them to do what they want, like they’ve got a degree and they will be set up for life … but from what I’veexperienced and seen through my brother and friends it’s not quite as simple as that … employers arebecoming ever more cut-throat about who they wish to recruit. (Oliver, male) Such concerns further framed how students came to view the value and currency of their higher education credentials for their future employability. Mass higher education was seen as
higher education credentials for their future employability. Mass higher education was seen as bringingabout an inflationary rise in formal credentials that had the ultimate effect of lowering their statusand exchange value in the labour market. With the growth in graduates leaving university, thesecredentials were seen to be commonplace and easier to attain. As a result of this, the students inthis study were concerned with what they saw as a lowering of their symbolic value. These creden-tials were no longer seen as providing a ‘badge of distinction’ or conferring upon graduates eliteor honorific status that marked them out as distinct. These views were further reinforced by agrowing sense that employers not able to distinguish between vast amounts of similarly qualifiedstudents. The views of the following business studies student reflect students’ concerns with thelack of distinction and status of higher education credentials in mass higher education.  There are so many people with degrees now that it is becoming difficult for employers to tell them apart … with so many people with degrees it means far less than it used to, like you are another personwho has gone through the conveyor belt. I’d say you were at advantage having one but it won’t beenough on its own to get you a job. (Hugh, male) Even amongst these high-achieving students, who were aware that they were at the elite end of the higher education market, there was still a sense that there would be similar competition forhighly sough-after graduate jobs. This sense of positional conflict is giving rise to genuineconcerns and anxieties around the limitations of so-called hard credentials in shaping labourmarket outcomes. The perceived need to add value and distinction to credentials The perceived importance of grades and institutional profileIn light of students’ concerns about positional competition, credential inflation and the declining currency of their hard credentials, the data also revealed a --- credential inflation and the declining currency of their hard credentials, the data also revealed a concern amongst students about theneed to add value and distinction to these credentials, mainly as a way of ‘standing apart’ fromother graduates with similar profiles and achievements. Significantly, it is students’ perceived
56  M. Tomlinson need for credential distinction that appears to be influencing the types of rationalities they are developing around learning. There was a growing sense amongst students that they had to ‘do allthey could’ to give themselves a positional advantage in the labour market. This was typicallyexpressed in the importance they attached to grades, the profile of their institution and, in somecases, the extra human capital of postgraduate credentials, all of which were seen as a potentialmeans of achieving a positional advantage in the labour market. The issue of degree classification featured strongly in the way students looked to gain posi- tional advantage in the labour market. 1 Indeed, there was a tendency for them to see it as being potentially significant in shaping future labour market potential and outcomes. While there wasa tendency for students to view degree classification as a reflection of their future labour marketpotential, it was largely seen in terms of providing a positional advantage in the graduatemarket. Underpinning this was a perception that employers would use degree classification as ameans of discriminating between increasingly large numbers of graduates with similar academiccredentials. In their earlier work on studentship in elite French universities, Bourdieu and Passeron (1979) developed the notion of the ‘cult of the grade’ to describe the leisurely competition amongstprivileged students to pass their academic time. For the students in the present study, grades wereseen in a far more instrumental light; largely in terms of their positional value in the labour market– as the following views highlight:  It is extremely important [degree classification], just because you need to get a 2.1 to get a decent job and if you don’t you can’t apply for too many firms. I guess employers judge you by your examresults and I think the fact they look at it like that is important. It is important for the type of contractyou get, which types of
look at it like that is important. It is important for the type of contractyou get, which types of firms you apply for and what type of salary you get. (Yasmin, female, lawstudent) I think a 2.1 is okay and I generally think if I got lower than that I’d have failed. I do know people who graduated last year with not great results and they are now experiencing problems. (Ellen,female, history student) Such instrumental concerns over grade classification took clear primacy over more intrinsic values around self-development and ‘learning for its own sake’. The data revealed a dominantconcern among students around the ‘end outcome’ of their studies. This concern was perhapsreinforced by their sense that the disciplinary knowledge they acquired would have little, if no,direct transferability in the labour market, even for student in more ‘vocational’ subjects.Students’ strong emphasis on the explicit and tangible outcomes of their study reflects theincreasing instrumental rationality in their values around higher education. This appeared toframe how students appraised the value and, in many ways, the purpose of their learning. Suchperceptions are likely to be reinforced by the growing marketisation and changing financiallandscape of higher education (Naidoo 2003), generated by new fee arrangements, as much asgrowing competitive pressures in the graduate market. As one law student bluntly observed:  I really can’t see why people bother coming to university if they don’t get a 2.1 or above. Anything below that is not going to get you anywhere … like what sort of employer is going to even bothconsidering a student with a Third. (Frances, female) Such views are further echoed in the views of one male history student who, at the time of the interview, was approaching his final-year examinations. It was clear from his accounts that hewas equating the value of his higher education credential, and the wider experience around it,with its end outcome as measured by the grade:  My --- credential, and the wider experience around it,with its end outcome as measured by the grade:  My main motivation has really been to get the best grades I can. Yes, I’ve enjoyed the experience and everything, but now it’s a case of doing all I can to achieve my main goal which is a good grade. Iwill be totally gutted if I got lower than a 2.1. (Ralph, male, business studies student)
a clear sense that employers harboured a deep-seatedbias towards students with traditional academic profiles. This was anticipated as a reality thatwould advantage (or disadvantage) different groups of graduates. The perceived importance of soft credentials Whilst, as the above evidence clearly suggests, adding value to formal credentials is seen as an important issue of their employability, there was also a very strong sense among these studentsfor the need to develop and deploy credentials that fell outside their formal learning. A strongemphasis was placed upon what can be termed soft credentials.  This was built upon a prevalent view that their graduateness, or potential as graduates, was no longer represented through theirformal achievements in higher education. A heavy emphasis instead was placed upon the need todevelop a narrative of employability that encompassed experiences and achievement outside oftheir degrees. The evidence suggests that higher education students are using the discourse ofexperience or, what Brown and Hesketh (2004) term the ‘economy of experience’, in understand-ing their future employability and labour market outcomes. Such narratives therefore not onlyinvolve formal educational achievements, but also the development of extra-curricula activitiesand skills. These were further viewed as having potential utility value in the graduate market. A dominant concern among the students in this study was that of trying to package these soft credentials in ways that conveyed the potential calibre of them as individual graduates. In linewith their concerns about the growing homogenisation of hard credentials, students looked uponthe Curriculum Vitae as an important tool for projecting a narrative of individual potential,competence and skill. This was seen as being particularly important during early stages of labourmarket entry such as the application and recruitment process. As the following male engineeringand English students argue, the
and recruitment process. As the following male engineeringand English students argue, the anticipated need to project individualised attributes and achieve-ment is typically seen as a way for graduates to distinguish themselves in a congested market:  I think it’s now becoming based upon simply what you have done outside your degree and what your experiences are. I think this is because everyone now seems to have a degree it doesn’t say a lot aboutthe individual. (Wayne, male, engineering student) --- 58  M. Tomlinson I think employers attempt to engage with the person, like in terms of what they have done, Employers will want to get a much bigger picture of the student other than their degree. This is meaning less andless these days. (Adrian, male, English student) The students interviewed in this study were therefore concerned with teasing out the potential market value of these experiences. Whilst these activities often formed a part of students’ lifestyleactivities, they were also seen as potentially adding to their ‘marketability’ as graduates. Theywere viewed as a means of conveying added-value skills and competences. This again relatesback to students’ understanding of the degree in itself being a blunt instrument in the labourmarket. As the views of the following female engineering student suggest, students appear awareof employers’ growing emphasis on personal and behavioural attributes of graduates, and not justskills and knowledge contained within what she views as the rigid structure of the degree:  I think the degree tells half the story – a lot more of it is to do with what you have done outside your degree, like what sport you’re in to and what societies you are involved in. I think the degree is a veryforced structure whereby people are forced to go along with the system. So I think employers arelooking for evidence of initiative and motivation in what graduates have done aside from theirdegrees. (Lisa, female, engineering student) These more personal, social and behavioural credentials were seen as being particularly important in the recruitment stage where employers would be assessing graduates’ ‘live attributes’.Crucially, students increasingly viewed their employability as matter of ‘what they are about’ asindividuals, as much as their technical know-how and cognitive skills. In the case of highlycompetitive and tough-entry jobs, the issue of ‘social fit’ between individual graduates andemployers was seen to be significant in shaping their
‘social fit’ between individual graduates andemployers was seen to be significant in shaping their outcomes. Such perceptions again reinforcestudents’ concerns about the limitation of hard educational credentials in accessing desired formsof employment, as the views of two female business and economics students highlight:  I think you’ve got to show that you have a good personality – basically that you’re an all rounder who doesn’t focus one area … a lot of it is how you come across as a person and what sort of personalityyou project, as well as things like appearance and dress. Much of it depends on how well they feelyou fit into the company and so a lot of it is about the impression you make. (Julie, female, businessstudent) The personality of the candidate is definitely going to make a difference because people whop are hiring you will be interested to see if you will be able to fit into the firm and that you can work to theparticular culture they have … a lot of it is about marketing yourself. (Marie, female, economicsstudent) Discussion and conclusion The present study has highlighted the various tensions and concerns experienced by higher educa- tion students around the role and utility of their higher education credentials in shaping theirfuture labour market outcomes. It has also shown some of the contradictions in students’ under-standing of the potential currency of their university qualifications. It is clear that students stillview higher education credentials as positioning them favourably in what is seen as a hierarchicallabour market. These credentials are seen as providing added human and cultural capital to openup employment opportunities that would otherwise be limited. To this extent, students appear tohave internalised the dominant view of ‘education as a return’ so prevalent in current highereducation policy. However, this study has also highlighted serious limitations in the human capital framework that continues to exert much influence on
serious limitations in the human capital framework that continues to exert much influence on current higher education policy (DfES 2003, 2004). Theframework has been exposed as an unreliable tool for understanding the concept of employability,as well as the relationship between educational credentials and labour market outcomes. The
British Journal of Sociology of Education  59 evidence clearly shows that students understand their future labour market outcomes as being more complex than simply possessing extra credentials and technical knowledge from highereducation. Ultimately, higher education students view themselves to be in a positional competi-tion amongst a growing supply of graduates entering the labour market with similar profiles andaspirations. The task facing students is that of gaining a positional advantage in a competitivelabour market where employers are placing increasingly less emphasis on academic credentials(Brown and Hesketh 2004). This study has highlighted how higher education students are ratio-nalising this problem and some of the strategies they are adopting as a response. The increasinglyinstrumental values and attitudes highlighted in this study appear to be a response to anticipatedcompetitive pressures in the labour market, as well as growing financial burdens experiencedduring and after graduation. It is clear that higher education students see the need to add value totheir credentials in light of their weakening currency. Increasingly, students are attaching growingimportance to so-called ‘soft’ currencies; they appear to be increasingly couching their employ-ability around personal and social credentials, and are attempting to make these fit into thechanging demands of employers. A limitation of this study is its limited sample of students, confined to a high-status university comprising relatively privileged, middle-class, high-achieving young people. However, thetensions explicit in their views highlight many significant tensions being played out by theseyoung people in pursuit of labour market rewards. They may be further mirroring wider culturaltensions among the expanding middle class who are finding it increasingly difficult to subscribeto traditional notions of merit as a way of winning positional advantage (Ball 2002; Brown andHesketh 2004). The study
of merit as a way of winning positional advantage (Ball 2002; Brown andHesketh 2004). The study also raises some serious issues around equality and social exclusion inthe graduate labour market. The expansion of higher education has been welcomed in manyquarters. The advantages of mass higher education have been framed in terms of both economicefficiency and social justice. The students in the present study were clearly aware that the role ofuniversities in reproducing occupational rewards is changing. It is clear that, even among studentswith similar educational and cultural profiles, not all will achieve equal labour market returns(Power et al. 2003). At the same time, these students are able to draw upon various cultural andeducational advantages. Moreover, they are more able to access the types of ‘experiences’ thatadd value to their credentials, as well as the social and personal skills increasingly being valuedby employers in the elite end of the market. A further issue relates to the changing role of universities in terms of processes of wider social and economic reproduction, a role that has continued to change shape since the time of Bourdieuand Passeron’s study into studentship (Boudieu and Passeron 1979). The expanded and unifiedsystem of higher education may, at one level, be blurring social divisions in the acquisition ofsymbolic and economic goods used to maximise individuals’ positions in the economic field.However, this may mask the fact that elite and mass higher education often co-exist (Scott 1995),and that this co-existence is likely to intensify positional difference and the levels of symboliccapital amongst different graduates. Inequalities in symbolic power and capital rest uneasily withnot only policy-makers’ attempts to couch the expansion of higher education in neutral, merito-cratic terms, but also with more optimistic visions of the universities as potential sites of personaland cognitive transformation which transcend learners’
universities as potential sites of personaland cognitive transformation which transcend learners’ pre-existing cultural habitus (Barnett1996). Mass higher education encompasses an increasingly larger body of students who have tradi- tionally been positioned outside the graduate labour market. The views, experiences and culturaltensions of these types of students are now well documented (Leathwood and O’ Connell 2003;Reay, David and Ball 2006). While higher education might offer some of these students anemancipating hand – both culturally and economically – many continue to be excluded from labour market opportunity structures. The associated risks of participating in higher education for
60  M. Tomlinson these students are also considerably higher than for those positioned more strongly in the higher education and labour market field (Archer and Hutchings 2000). The evidence clearly shows thatemployers play an active role in reinforcing patterns of labour market inequality amongstdifferent graduates (Harvey, Moon and Geall 1997; Brown and Hesketh 2004). The expansion ofmass higher education, together with the corresponding decline in the value of academic creden-tials for labour market returns, is likely to reinforce these inequalities. Note 1. The majority of UK bachelors’ degrees are divided into firsts, upper seconds (2.1), lower seconds (2.2), thirds and passes without honours. Figures from the UK’s Higher Education Statistics Agency show thatin 2006 the percentage of UK first-degree graduates attaining a 2.1 classification was 45%, comparedwith 30% gaining 2.2 degrees, 11% with firsts and 7% with thirds or passes. Many UK graduateemployers specify a 2.1 (or above) as a desirable, sometimes pre-requisite, entry requirement. References Abell, P. 1991.  Rational choice theory.  Aldershot: Brockfield. Archer, L., and M. Hutchings. 2000. ‘Bettering yourself’?: Discourses of risk, cost and benefit in ethnically diverse, young, working class non-participants’ construction of higher education.  British Journal of Sociology of Education  22, no. 4: 555–75. Ashton. D.N., and F. Green. 1996.  Education, training and the global economy.  Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. Ball, S.J. 2002.  Class strategies and the education market: The middle classes and social advantage. London: Routledge Falmer. Barnett, R. 1996. Being and becoming’: A student trajectory.  International Journal of Lifelong Learning 15, no. 2: 72–84. Battu, H., C. Belfield, and P. Sloane. 2000. How can we measure graduate over-education and its effects? National Institute of Economic Review  171: 82–93. Becker, G.S. 1993.  Human capital: Theoretical and empirical analysis with special reference to
Becker, G.S. 1993.  Human capital: Theoretical and empirical analysis with special reference to education. 3rd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Bell, D. 1973.  The coming of the post-industrial society: A venture in social forecasting.  New York: Basic Books. Bourdieu, P. 1988.  Homo academicus.  Cambridge: Polity Press. Bourdieu, P., and J.C. Passeron. 1979.  The inheritors: French students and their relation with culture. Chicago: Chicago University Press. Brown, P. 2000. The globalisation of positional competition.  Sociology  34, no. 4: 633–53. Brown, P., and A.J. Hesketh. 2004.  The mismanagement of talent: Employability and jobs in the knowledge economy.  Oxford: Oxford University Press. Brynin, M. 2002. Overqualification in employment.  Work, Employment and Society  16, no. 4: 637–54. Castells, M. 1994. The university system: Engine of development in the new world economy. In  Revitalising higher education,  ed. J. Salmi and A.M. Verspoor, 14–40. Oxford: Pergamon. Collins, R. 1979.  The credential society: An historical sociology of education and stratification.  New York: Academic Press. Department for Education and Skills. 2003.  The future of higher education.  London: HMSO. ———. 2004.  The higher education act.  London: HMSO. Fevre, R., G. Rees, and S. Gorard. 1999. Some sociological alternatives to human capital theory and their implications for research on post-compulsory education and training.  Journal of Education and Work 12, no. 2: 117–40. Harvey, L., S. Moon, and V. Geall. 1997.  Graduates’ work: Organisational change and students’ attributes.  Birmingham: QHE. Hirsch, F. 1977.  The social limits to growth.  London: Routledge. Hodkinson, P., A. Sparkes, and H. Hodkinson. 1996.  Triumphs and tears: Young people, markets and the transition from school to work.  London: David Fulton. Keep, E., and K. Mayhew. 2004. The economic and distributional implications of current policies on higher education.  Oxford Review of Economic Policy  20, no.
implications of current policies on higher education.  Oxford Review of Economic Policy  20, no. 2: 298–314. --- British Journal of Sociology of Education  61 Leathwood, C., and P. O’Connell. 2003. ‘It’s a struggle’: The construction of the ‘new student’ in higher education.  Journal of Education Policy  18, no. 6: 597–615. Mason, G. 2002. High skills utilisation under mass higher education: Graduate employment in service industries in Britain.  Journal of Education and Work  15, no. 4: 427–56. Moreau, M.P., and C. Leathwood. 2006. Balancing paid work and studies: Working (-class) students in higher education.  Studies in Higher Education  31, no. 1: 23–42. Naidoo, R. 2003. Repositioning higher education as a global commodity: Opportunities for future sociol- ogy of education work.  British Journal of Sociology of Education  24, no. 2: 249–59. Organisation for Economic Development and Cooperation. 2003.  Education at a glance.  Paris: OECD. Power, S., T. Edwards, G. Whitty, and V. Wigfall. 2003.  Education and the middle classes.  Buckingham: Open University Press. Reay, D., M.E. David, and S.J. Ball. 2006.  Degrees of choice: Social class, race and gender in higher education.  Stoke on Trent: Trentham Books. Schuller, T., S. Baron, and J. Field. 2000.  Social capital: Critical perspectives.  Oxford: Oxford University Press. Schultz, T.W. 1961.  Investment in human capital.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Scott, P. 1995.  The meanings of mass higher education.  Buckingham: Open University Press. Thurow, L.C. 1977. Education and economic equality. In  Power and ideology in education,  ed. J. Karabel and A.H. Halsey, 325–35. New York: Oxford University Press. Weber, M. 1948.  From Max Weber: Essays in sociology.  Trans., ed. and intro. H.H. Gerth and C.W. Mills. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
El artículo "The degree is not enough": students’ perceptions of the role of higher education credentials for graduate work and employability, escrito por Michael Tomlinson y publicado en el British Journal of Sociology of Education, investiga cómo los estudiantes perciben la relevancia de sus credenciales educativas en el mercado laboral contemporáneo. La investigación se basa en un estudio cualitativo que incluye entrevistas con 53 estudiantes de último año de una universidad del Reino Unido, anterior a 1992.

### Contexto y Objetivos
El estudio se desarrolla en un contexto donde el gobierno británico promueve la educación superior como una inversión que debería traducirse en beneficios laborales. Sin embargo, la relación entre las credenciales educativas y sus retornos en el mercado laboral ha cambiado, lo que genera dudas sobre la efectividad de un título universitario en la actualidad.

### Hallazgos Principales
1. **Percepción de las Credenciales**: Los estudiantes sienten que sus calificaciones académicas están perdiendo relevancia en la determinación de sus resultados laborales. Aunque las credenciales siguen siendo importantes, los estudiantes consideran que no son suficientes por sí solas.

2. **Competencia en el Mercado Laboral**: En un mercado laboral saturado, los estudiantes sienten la necesidad de "agregar valor" a sus títulos, lo que implica complementar sus credenciales académicas con habilidades y experiencias adicionales.

3. **Cambio en la Mentalidad**: Los estudiantes ven su educación como un proceso que debe incluir el desarrollo de competencias adicionales, como prácticas laborales y habilidades interpersonales, en lugar de enfocarse únicamente en obtener un título.

### Implicaciones
La percepción de los estudiantes sobre la insuficiencia de un título universitario refleja una tendencia más amplia en la educación superior, donde la obtención de un grado ya no garantiza el éxito laboral. Esto plantea desafíos para las instituciones educativas y para los estudiantes, quienes deben ser proactivos en la construcción de su perfil profesional.

### Conclusión
El estudio de Tomlinson destaca la necesidad de que los estudiantes diversifiquen sus credenciales y experiencias para mejorar su empleabilidad en un entorno laboral competitivo. Se enfatiza la importancia de una educación que fomente el desarrollo de habilidades prácticas y experiencias relevantes, más allá de la mera obtención de títulos.

### Contexto Histórico y Teórico
El artículo también aborda cómo la introducción de tarifas de matrícula y la expansión de la educación superior han cambiado la dinámica del mercado laboral. Se presentan dos interpretaciones sobre la relación entre las credenciales educativas y los resultados laborales: la teoría del capital humano, que ve las credenciales como una inversión en habilidades, y la teoría del conflicto posicional, que sugiere que las credenciales son más una cuestión de estatus y competencia.

### Desigualdades en el Mercado Laboral
El texto destaca que, a pesar de la expansión de la educación superior, persisten desigualdades en la percepción de los graduados según la institución de la que provienen. Los estudiantes creen que los empleadores discriminan entre diferentes tipos de graduados, favoreciendo a aquellos de universidades tradicionales.

### Inflación de Credenciales
Se menciona que la masificación de la educación superior ha llevado a una inflación de credenciales, donde los títulos se han vuelto comunes y su valor simbólico ha disminuido. Los estudiantes sienten que deben añadir valor a sus credenciales para destacarse en un mercado laboral saturado.

### Experiencias Extracurriculares y Credenciales Blandas
Los estudiantes también reconocen la importancia de las experiencias extracurriculares y las habilidades blandas en su empleabilidad. Estas experiencias son vistas como cruciales para demostrar competencias adicionales que los títulos por sí solos no reflejan.

### Ajuste Social y Personalidad
El ajuste social entre graduados y empleadores se considera un factor determinante en el proceso de selección. Los estudiantes ven su empleabilidad como un reflejo de su identidad individual y de sus habilidades técnicas y sociales.

### Tensión entre Educación y Mercado Laboral
El estudio revela tensiones significativas en la percepción de los estudiantes sobre el valor de sus credenciales en un mercado laboral competitivo. A pesar de que consideran que sus títulos les otorgan una ventaja, también reconocen que la competencia es intensa y que las credenciales por sí solas no garantizan el éxito.

### Conclusión Final
El artículo de Tomlinson ilustra cómo los estudiantes de educación superior están adaptando sus estrategias y percepciones en un entorno laboral cambiante. A pesar de la expansión de la educación superior, las desigualdades persisten, y los estudiantes deben navegar un mercado laboral donde la educación se presenta como un camino hacia el éxito, pero donde las oportunidades no son equitativas para todos.
