Article Anne M. Brown † Stephanie N. Lewis ‡ David R. Bevan †* From the †Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, 24061, Virginia, ‡Ofﬁce of Undergraduate Academic Affairs, VirginiaTech, Blacksburg, 24061, Virginia Abstract Participating in undergraduate research can be a pivotal expe- rience for students in life science disciplines. Development ofcritical thinking skills, in addition to conveying scientiﬁc ideas in oral and written formats, is essential to ensuring that stu- dents develop a greater understanding of basic scientiﬁcknowledge and the research process. Modernizing the current life sciences research environment to accommodate the growing demand by students for experiential learning isneeded. By developing and implementing a structured, theory-based approach to undergraduate research in the life sciences, speciﬁcally biochemistry, it has been successfullyshown that more students can be provided with a high- quality, high-impact research experience. The structure of this approach allowed students to develop novel, independentprojects in a computational molecular modeling lab. Students engaged in an experience in which career goals, problem-solving skills, time management skills, and independence in a research lab were developed. After experiencing thisapproach to undergraduate research, students reported feel- ing challenged to think critically and prepared for future career paths. The approach allowed for a progressive learning envi-ronment where more undergraduate students could partici- pate in publishable research. Future areas for development include implementation in a bench-top lab and extension todisciplines beyond biochemistry. In this study, it has been shown that utilizing the structured approach to undergraduate research could allow for more students to experience under-graduate research and develop into more conﬁdent, inde- pendent life scientists well prepared for graduate schools and professional research environments. VC2016
life scientists well prepared for graduate schools and professional research environments. VC2016 by The Interna- tional Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 44(5):463–474, 2016. Keywords: undergraduate research; mentoring; high-impact activities; development and implementation Introduction Participation in an engaging undergraduate research expe- rience (URE) can be an invaluable opportunity for under-graduate students to develop both academic and professio- nal skills [1]. Undergraduate student researchers, deﬁned as undergraduates who choose to participate in the scien-tiﬁc research process to gain experience and inform career goals traditionally in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), can have a variety of experiences and outcomes. The implications of a research experience now extend to areas of medicine, business, and the arts as well [2]. While summer research experiences provide anabbreviated but in-depth exposure to the research process, greater beneﬁts and gains have been observed in yearlong UREs, highlighting a need for more students to become involved in undergraduate research during the academic year [3]. However, increasing undergraduate student par-ticipation places a greater burden on faculty time and resources, ultimately leading to a small number of students in a given lab and increased competition for yearlong UREs[4]. In addition, little change or development in the basic structure and curriculum related to undergraduate research has been reported in the past decade, especially in the biomedical research environment [5, 6], despite the trend in technological advances and professional needs inthe research arena. There is a need to increase the numberVolume 44, Number 5, September/October 2016, Pages 463–474 Abbreviations: URE, undergraduate research experience; STEM, science, technology, engineering, and mathematics; URT, undergradu- ate research trainee; SURS, senior undergraduate research student; PI, principal
URT, undergradu- ate research trainee; SURS, senior undergraduate research student; PI, principal investigator; GRM, graduate research mentor; CTC, critical thinking and research communication skills *Address for correspondence: 201 Fralin Life Sciences Center, Blacksburg, VA 24061. E-mail: drbevan@vt.edu Received 11 September 2015; Revised 30 January 2016; Accepted 3 March 2016 DOI 10.1002/bmb.20975 Published online 28 April 2016 in Wiley Online Library(wileyonlinelibrary.com)Development of a Structured Undergraduate Research Experience: Framework and Implications Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 463
of students participating an academic year URE and to develop the URE to better ﬁt skill-sets needed in a biomedi-cal research environment and post-graduate education. There is a shift toward the mindset that UREs need to focus more on student interpretation of results and developmentof critical thinking skills, in addition to mastery of experi-mental techniques [4]. However, assessment of skills, level of competency gained, and overall perceptions from the URE are not well studied and often lack pedagogical back-ing [5]. In order to advance the state of UREs and improve student outcomes, a new approach is required to meet the growing demand from students and university initiatives.The presented approach identiﬁes increased student partic- ipation and higher-level engagement as room for improve- ment in an URE and shows that with a structured,pedagogical-based approach to URE, more students areable to participate in the URE and develop both research methods and critical thinking skills at a higher level than before implementation. Implications for Increased Student Participation in an URE Studies suggest that UREs are high-impact activities that improve the educational outcomes of students who partici-pate [7]. This suggestion is also supported by studentresponses from an alumni feedback survey, which foundthat students who participated in UREs reported higher sat-isfaction and overall personal growth as compared withthose who did not participate [5]. Additionally, studentswho participated in novel research exploration derived agreater understanding and appreciation for the researchprocess and application of basic science knowledge, whilecontributing something worthwhile to the scientiﬁc commu-nity [8]. Depending on the type of institution and goals ofthe department curriculum, there are multiple approachesto undergraduate research. These approaches have been detailed and state the variety of beneﬁts for having students being both active and passive in the URE, [9,
and state the variety of beneﬁts for having students being both active and passive in the URE, [9, 10] and howUREs can ﬁt into the curriculum in a variety of ways. Current Obstacles Teaching and research are often isolated endeavors atresearch universities [11]. As described by Elsen et al . (2009), if universities strengthen their “research-teachingnexus,” then more students will be able to participate inthe URE, regardless of discipline [12]. Healey (2005) pro-posed that there are two main focus areas in most UREs,with the experience usually favoring one rather than both.A focus on content in an URE is geared more toward writ-ten and oral presentation deliverables, while a focus onresearch process is attentive to student engagement in allparts of the research cycle with students leading and designing experiments [10]. Furthermore, there is a need to address the pressures surrounding undergraduate research, as deﬁned by Beck- man and Hensel [13]. Such pressures include the URE beingeither student initiated or faculty initiated, biased at studentlevels (ﬁrst-year vs. senior, honors vs. non-honors students),and focusing on either the process or products of researchrather than learning outcomes. In addition, universities often lack the resources to involve a majority of the undergraduate population in undergraduate research [14, 15]. The ratio oftotal student population to number of available lab positions,which is based on materials, lab space, mentoring capacity,and number of projects, translates to a small percentage ofstudents who can participate in an engaging URE for an extended period of time. With these obstacles present in most undergraduate research programs at both the departmentaland university level, we sought to explore a method thatwould address both sides of the pressures mentioned aboveas related to the life sciences ﬁeld. The promotion of similar teaching pedagogies across dis- ciplines and better discourse on how to improve the overallundergraduate
pedagogies across dis- ciplines and better discourse on how to improve the overallundergraduate research environment in the life sciences canbe achieved [9]. Training effective and successful junior research scientists should incorporate independent research projects and reﬂective discussions on how students learn inorder to improve the efﬁcacy of the research training experi-ence and the perceptions of the students regarding that expe-rience [11]. Conversations with students regarding theirexpectations for research experiences in the biochemistry ﬁeld led to the development of a program within the Bevan Molecular Modeling Lab at Virginia Tech, which is a research-intensive university. These conversations provided insight intothe varying experiences across campus for undergraduatestudents. The responses were in alignment with reports thatstated that students had difﬁculty learning research methodol- ogy and that varying levels of autonomy greatly inﬂuenced the URE [16, 17]. In order to fully prepare students for their nextcareer stage, students needed to participate in both focusareas proposed by Healy [10]. To this end, concepts in educa-tional theory should be incorporated into the URE and under-lay the basis of our framework for increasing the number of students participating in a high-quality URE. The purpose for developing this structured practice and framework was toprovide a consistent, individualized, self-sustaining researchexperience that trains undergraduates to become independ-ent researchers in the life science ﬁelds. Development of an URE Framework to Increase Student Participation andImprove Experience Outcomes The purpose of this article is to discuss the method of implementation of a student-centered research program inBiochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 464 Development of a Structured Undergraduate Research Experience  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva
5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
an individual lab that is backed in theory by a student- centered framework [9]. We sought to increase the number of students participating in a high-quality URE. In ourreport, a high-quality URE experience is determined both by student feedback and analysis of critical thinking skills presented in ﬁnal deliverables as determined by professio-nals in the ﬁeld. In addition, we provide resources and detailed discussion of such implementation of a student- centered research program and how it can be implementedon the individual lab, departmental, and college-wide lev- els. The Bevan Molecular Modeling lab has been estab- lished as an environment for computational modeling thatencourages collaboration with experimental labs. Molecu- lar modeling techniques have increasingly been recognized as a means to predict biological outcomes and elucidatedetails at an atomistic level. The lab participates in many collaborative projects involving therapeutic drug discovery and development for cancer, allergies, and chronic inﬂam-matory diseases. The breadth of projects and speed of the techniques makes the lab perfectly poised to provide a 1- to 2-year research experience for undergraduates. Projectscan be easily divided into segments that can be accom- plished by a single student, a group of students, or a series of students over longer periods of time. The established col-laborative environment is conducive to assembling the pro- posed URE structure. In order to address the obstacles described above and to engage more students in a student-centered URE in the life sciences ﬁeld, the model introduced and described by Brew in 2013 [9] was used as a template. Adjustments tothe design included incorporation of students at all aca- demic levels (ﬁrst-year to senior) into the URE and estab- lishing autonomy in the laboratory across the levels. Inaddition, various pedagogical-based implementations were made, speciﬁcally related to learning objectives and assess- ment. Explicit attention
were made, speciﬁcally related to learning objectives and assess- ment. Explicit attention to implementation and assessmentof curricular and pedagogical goals needs to be determined before any type of implementation of an URE. By informing the students of the accepted practices, purpose and goals ofthe URE, the individual lab/department/college can better meet the educational needs and expectations of students who would be apprehensive of such experiences. Establish-ing a self-sustaining, self-propagating lab environment allows students to become experts who can in turn train more students in the lab. At the onset of the implementation of this framework, the “structured” approach came from the idea that stu- dents are accustomed to course syllabi and the standar-dized outline for courses. At the start of every semester, all courses disseminate a syllabus that gives the student a timeline with course expectations. However, this practice isoften neglected for an URE because it is not a traditional course or course environment. Most undergraduate institu- tions utilize a system in which undergraduate research isdone for credit and graded (A–F). While it is necessary tobe mindful of different strategies to assess undergraduate research across disciplines, establishment of a standard approach for the department, especially related to assess-ment, will beneﬁt students and set a baseline for learning outcomes and graded assignments [9]. A standard set of expectations across a department/discipline, which is com-mon practice for traditional courses, would negate varia- tions in expectations while improving learning outcomes. In this regard, we have structured the approach to under-graduate research to be consistent with a typical course format while maintaining elements that make the URE autonomous, student centered, and focused on developmentof skills related to critical thinking, oral presentation, andwritten dissemination of scientiﬁc work. The following sec- tions
thinking, oral presentation, andwritten dissemination of scientiﬁc work. The following sec- tions breakdown the structured URE developed to increase student participating and engagement. These sections pro-vide detailed rationale for incorporation into the URE. Syllabus When developing the syllabus, the ﬁrst goal was to moveaway from an unstructured research experience, which isdeﬁned as students working in a lab on an individual pro- ject with no explicit knowledge of learning objectives, grad- ing system, or overall timeline. A syllabus was establishedto eliminate “unknowns” for the students. The syllabus was structured to allow students to have the experience of exe- cuting independent research projects and partaking inresearch process workshops. Learning objectives were stated (Table I), and a breakdown of graded elements and assessment methods, deadlines for deliverables, and detailson weekly workshops were provided. A lab objective was stated for the URE and gave stu- dents perspective into the types of approaches used and theoverall research focus for the lab. “Undergraduate research experience for students in their freshman, sophomore, junior, and senior years of study. Bevan Lab focuses on using computational biology and bio- informatics techniques, including molecular dynamics,molecular docking, homology modeling, and biomolecularvisualization, to understand protein structure and dynam- ics, and aid in novel drug design.” The learning objectives for the course were also dis- cussed and related to both the individual projects of the stu- dents and the deliverables each student was expected tosubmit to the graduate students and PI. All assignmentswere used to assess progression of learning and retention of research process as well as individual project knowledge. A proposed agenda of the weekly group meetings was also included in the syllabus and gave students the oppor- tunity to see what topics would be discussed, plan their presentation dates, and have
the oppor- tunity to see what topics would be discussed, plan their presentation dates, and have input into what topics arepresented at the weekly workshop sessions. Deliverables, Brown et al. 465  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Learning objectives for participants and mentors in the URE Investor Learning objective Assessment Undergraduate Research Trainee (URT)Learn basic research practices. Participation in weekly workshops. Progress toward completion of independent research project.Weekly check-in meetings with GRM and PI. Maintain a lab notebook. Research notebook checks at weekly meetings. Present scientiﬁc ﬁndings in written format. Check point documents during semester: Abstract, Introduction, and Final paper. Present scientiﬁc ﬁndings in oral format. Final research presentation at the end of the semester.Critique oral presentations of peers. Peer evaluation rubrics completed during presentations.Collaborate with peers in lab. Weekly check-in meetings with GRM and PI. Senior Undergraduate Research Student (SURS)Learn basic research practices. Participation in weekly workshops and presentation of one workshop. Progress toward completion of independent research project.Weekly check-in meetings with GRM and PI. Maintain a lab notebook. Research notebook checks at weekly meetings. Present scientiﬁc ﬁndings in written format. Check point documents during semester: Abstract, Introduction, and Final paper. Present scientiﬁc ﬁndings in oral format. Final research presentation at the end of the semester.Critique oral presentations of peers. Peer evaluation rubrics completed during presentations.Collaborate with peers in lab. Discussions with SURS about research progress. Develop mentoring skills. Discussions with SURS about mentoring techniques. Present at a research symposium. Compose and present a research poster at university undergraduate research symposium. Graduate Research Mentor (GRM)Develop mentoring skills. Conversations with PI about mentoring techniques. Participate in mentoring workshops at the university or at conferences. Manage projects and personnel. Progression of research projects by URTs and SURS in the lab. Develop teaching style. Coursework in pedagogy courses and/or
projects by URTs and SURS in the lab. Develop teaching style. Coursework in pedagogy courses and/or workshops at the university or at conferences. Learn pedagogical practices. Each investor (column 1) participates in research following a list of learning objectives (column 2) and is assessed (column 3) continuously through out the semester.TABLE IBiochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 466 Development of a Structured Undergraduate Research Experience  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
such as the ﬁnal paper and ﬁnal presentation, required the generation of grading rubrics (Tables II and III), whichwere provided to students at the beginning of the semester.Providing the rubrics early conveyed clear expectations with established grading metrics. This aided in the stu-dents’ progression throughout the semester and improvedGrading rubric to assess content of URE ﬁnal papers TABLE II Brown et al. 467  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
the quality of their check-in deliverables (e.g., the abstract and introduction section for the ﬁnal paper turned in half way through the semester). We also sought to maintain ele-ments in our rubrics that would be essential to students inother molecular biology and biochemistry courses. Some elements that were easily transferable to other coursework were the use of proper citations, development of a scientiﬁcvoice, and practice in writing the methods sections ofGrading rubric for URE ﬁnal presentations TABLE IIIBiochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 468 Development of a Structured Undergraduate Research Experience  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
manuscripts. Such skills are required for courses and asso- ciated labs, and tied their experiences in the research lab to experiences in their traditional core courses. Grading and Assessment A section on grading and assessment was added to the syl- labus for two reasons. The ﬁrst reason was to provide the student with a clear understanding of expectations for theURE and what would constitute the grade received at the end of the semester. Secondly, setting comprehensive expectations would allow for grade equality regardless ofacademic level and number of credits enrolled for the URE. If a student is not performing as expected, the faculty has a clear “contract” with the student indicating what a studentshould expect to gain from working with the faculty mem- ber and his/her lab. If there are issues in participation and performance, these issues can be quantiﬁed as a grade,which students are accustomed to interpreting as an assessment of their skills development process. In the URE discussed here, the grade distribution was as follows: Notebook Documentation (20%), Participation in lab and lab meetings (20%), Final Presentation (30%) and Final Paper (30%). Participation was deﬁned as“attendance at all group lab meetings, substantial progress on individual research projects, and clear communication with mentors on any issues.” The inclusion of participationin the grade clearly conveyed the level of effort needed to fully contribute to the URE and see academic and professio- nal gains. The deliverables require proﬁciency in the research process (i.e., writing, discussion, methodology, and data analysis), understanding of project-speciﬁc biological facts,and critical thinking in the research process. These deliver- ables provide the foundation of combining the multiple lev- els of an URE as discussed in the Current Obstacles section.This learning process and assessment is denoted in thegrading rubrics provided for the ﬁnal paper and ﬁnal pre- sentation assignments
is denoted in thegrading rubrics provided for the ﬁnal paper and ﬁnal pre- sentation assignments (Tables II and III). As a complete document, the syllabus addresses the goals of UREs: stu- dents should be held accountable for the critical thinking aspects of the project and the methodological skills devel- opment necessary to become well-rounded scientists of the future [4]. Group Meetings Weekly lab group meetings focused on honing research process skills while providing a platform for students to practice oral presentation skills. The weekly workshop allowed for the dissemination of key information related to the progression of the student in a manner that would require minimal repetition by the PI. For example, instead of detailing how to write an abstract for students in a one-on-one meeting, all students participate in a group discus- sion about the writing process. These workshops could be facilitated by a graduate student or a senior undergraduate student. Scheduling such sessions meant that interactions with the PI were reserved for individual meetings that included meaningful conversations about the progress of individual research projects. Additionally, students wereable to exhibit research process and content proﬁciency through using these presentation opportunities to prepare for honors thesis defenses and professional conferences. An example agenda is shown in Table IV with key workshop topics related to building skills in the researchprocess. Once faculty members commit to using a struc- tured approach to UREs, a standard syllabus and schedule generated for the fall and spring semesters can be used in subsequent years. Topics for workshop topics can include professional development (scientiﬁc writing and presenta- tion skills) and techniques speciﬁc to the research lab. For example, a spring workshop on a commonly used tech-nique in lab, Basics of Molecular Dynamics Simulations,Proposed schedule for fall semester Week 1 Orientation: syllabus,
of Molecular Dynamics Simulations,Proposed schedule for fall semester Week 1 Orientation: syllabus, introductions, questions Week 8 Graduate student presentation Week 2 Lab notebooks, research goals, ﬁle organization Week 9 Graduate student presentation Week 3 Predatory reading, How to write Abstracts & Intros, Journal club paper assignedWeek 10 Undergraduate Presentations (3) Week 4 How to give a good presentation Week 11 Undergraduate Presentations (3) Week 5 Journal Club – based on paper assigned week 3 Week 12 Undergraduate Presentations (3) Week 6 Fall Break Week 13 Undergraduate Presentations (3) Week 7 Peer review of Abstracts/Intros Week 14 FINAL PAPERS DUETABLE IV Brown et al. 469  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
was given to students in order to improve their base knowl- edge on techniques and jargon in the ﬁeld. Potential topics for other lab environments could include review of titra-tions and making buffer solutions, mass spectrometry, and high-performance liquid chromatography. By presenting this information to the group and allowing for discussionswhere questions about the topics can be addressed, more students beneﬁt than in one-on-one conversations detailing these techniques. Once the general framework for the URE is established, the workload for implementation becomes very managea- ble. One critique of establishing a single agenda to bereused over multiple years is that some students will redundantly experience the same topics multiple times. In the URE implemented and discussed here, studentsreported enjoying multiple workshops on the same topic because it helped them master the skill. In addition, senior students in the lab can lead workshops, thereby givingthem the ability to develop a deeper mastery of the subject. The usage of senior students in the teaching process can also lead to positive peer-to-peer mentoring relationshipsin a collaborative environment. Mentorship Undergraduate research students were broken down intosubset groups based on level and duration in the lab:undergraduate research trainee (URT) and senior under- graduate researcher (SUR). Each student level had speciﬁc learning objectives and deliverables that focused on theprogression of the student’s own undergraduate research project, the development of scientiﬁc writing and presenta- tion skills, and mentoring (Table I). Graduate research stu-dents were also included as a group, classiﬁed as graduate research mentor (GRM). In this URE, SURs mentored URTs, graduate students mentored both levels of undergraduatestudents, and the PI mentored all students (graduate and undergraduate). An added beneﬁt to this mentoring frame- work is that the research experience and mentoring sup-port from both
to this mentoring frame- work is that the research experience and mentoring sup-port from both principal investigators (PIs) and graduate students is thought to be supportive of women and minority students, giving them access to faculty and peers in theﬁeld [18]. Our structure allows graduate and undergraduate stu- dents in the sciences to beneﬁt both academically and pro-fessionally from a research mentoring relationship. It was important to the development of this URE to include gradu- ate students as research mentors in order to provide careerpreparation, teaching, and communication skills develop- ment. In the role of research mentor, graduate students have the opportunity to discuss and develop pedagogicaltechniques relating to teaching undergraduate students about research methods. The beneﬁts of being a mentor and mentee for both undergraduate and graduate studentshas been explored previously [19] and was observed in stu-dent feedback from our preliminary study. The undergrad- uate mentee sees senior undergraduates as peers who have achieved a breadth of knowledge in their major thatthey may aspire to achieve. The senior undergraduate mentor gains mentoring experience while achieving an increased level of understanding of a scientiﬁc subject (e.g.biochemistry). The graduate student as a mentor partici- pates in practical training for effective research mentoring and project management. The graduate student presentshis/her research to the undergraduate students, which serve as an example to the undergraduate students of graduate level achievement while providing the chance forprofessional development. As a mentee, the graduate stu- dent is able to explore career option conversations with the PI to assess how working with undergraduate researcherscan add to his/her professional skill set. The PI maintains the beneﬁts of providing UREs to more students, training and graduating research-focused undergraduates, potentialmatriculation of undergraduates into
and graduating research-focused undergraduates, potentialmatriculation of undergraduates into graduate programs at the home institution, and graduating pre-doctoral candi- dates prepared to succeed as science professionals. Effectiveness of Structured URE Assessment of Scalability and Improved Student Outcomes As the students progress through the semester, the learn- ing process should ensure that the ﬁnal product for the semester is a reﬂection of how much a student has advanced in learning the research process. The UREmethod presented was tested on a small pilot group of eight participants during the fall semester of 2013. This group of students was selected for survey because half had beenmembers of the lab before the implementation of this method and other students were new to the lab as of fall 2013 (deﬁned as pre- and post- implementation). Surveyswere given to all students who participated in the URE dur- ing the 2013–2014 academic year. Survey questions were composed to determine if the URE inﬂuenced academicperformance in core courses, gain feedback on changes related to critical thinking, assess gains in scientiﬁc paper comprehension and analysis, assess progression in scien-tiﬁc writing and presentation skills, and gauge comprehen- sion of project background and scope. Analyses on the out- comes for this URE are based on qualitative methods andreview of student survey data, in addition to outside review of student deliverables pre- and post- implementation of this structured method. Taken together, these analysis met-rics provided valuable insight regarding the effectiveness of the structured approach. The preliminary observational study discussed in this article was conducted on achieved student deliverables. The student artifacts were obtained prior to establishing a need for research data on a structured method. As themethod was developed and a need to quantitatively assessBiochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 470 Development of a Structured
quantitatively assessBiochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 470 Development of a Structured Undergraduate Research Experience  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
effectiveness arose, it was determined that approval for work with human subjects should be obtained. The reﬂec- tion questionnaire and purpose for formalizing the collec- tion of additional student data were submitted to the insti-tutional review board (IRB) for human-subject researchand was approved for further data collection (IRB# 14- 680). The posed reﬂection questions about the student experience were made a part of the reﬂection process for SURs, and student deliverables were scored for data collec- tion after students completed their UREs. Of the deliverables completed by each student each semester, the ﬁnal papers are the strongest indicator of the scientiﬁc work completed and knowledge gained from the provided experiences. The ﬁnal papers were used as a tool to assess the development of critical thinking and research communication skills (CTC) (Table V). A score was assigned to a subset of the papers submitted by students who were in the lab during the transition to the updated URE approach (Fig. 2 A) and two groups of students who were in the lab either before or after the transition (Fig. 2 B). We saw an increasing trend in CTC score in both groups of data. We also calculated a statistically signiﬁcant difference between the before and after scores. These data considered together suggest that students perform at a higher level of proﬁciency, as determined by outside review, under the updated URE structure. Finally, another measure of effec- tiveness for this URE approach is the ability to accommo- date an increased number of participating undergraduate students compared with our previous approach. Between 2010 and 2015, we were able to increase participation from 4 to 15 undergraduates ranging from ﬁrst-year stu- dents to seniors, an increase of almost three-fold over 5 years (Fig. 1). In addition, we were able to increase thenumber of students presenting research at professional conferences and co-authoring peer-reviewed publications (Fig. 1). The
research at professional conferences and co-authoring peer-reviewed publications (Fig. 1). The method discussed in this ar ticle was ﬁrst implemented in 2013 as an update to previous practices that worked for jun- ior- and senior-level students on a small scale. We saw the need to also open up research opportunities for ﬁrst-year Comparison of critical thinking and communication (CTC) sco res. The CTC score is based on an assessment rubric applied to the ﬁnal papers submitted by students. Each paper was scored by three individuals and the average scores are reported here. ( A) Scores for the same student (each line) before and after implementation of the proposed method ( N52). (B) Scores for different students (each circle) before and after implementation of the proposed method ( N54). Standard devia- tion for each point is represented by an I-shaped error bars. The asterisk (*) represents statistical signiﬁcance (Student’s t test, p<0.05). [Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.] Quantiﬁed outcomes of structured UREs. The fre- quency (y-axis) of students in each category per cohort year (x-axis), where the number students for a given year ( blue bars ), number of students participating in conference ( green bars ), and num- ber of students listed as authors on peer-reviewed publications ( gray ) are shown. The number of publications includes manuscripts that have been published, submitted, and that are in preparation.[Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.] FIG 2FIG 1 Brown et al. 471  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
students who are interested in pursuing research and are just starting their college careers. The peer-mentoring component h a sp r o v e nu s e f u lf o rh e l p i n gs u c hs t u d e n t sd ow e l li nt h e i rb i o -chemistry courses. The combinat ion of all URE initiatives in the lab allowed us to accommodate the registration of 13 under- graduate students for the URE in Fall 2015 and 15 students inSpring 2016. While the maximum number of students we can accommodate in productive res earch projects has not yet been reached, and we are unsure of that number, by implementingthe structured approach for URE, we were able to easily give more students an enriching research experience. It is recom- mended that scaling occur slowly in labs that wish to imple-ment this method in order to effectively establish the peer net-work and better manage the increased number of students. Therefore, with the usage of this method, we were able to scalet h er e s e a r c hl a bt oa c c o m m o d a t em o r es t u d e n t s ,i m p r o v et h e tangible outcomes of the student s URE (Fig. 1), improve the crit- ical thinking and communication skills of the students (Fig. 2),and start the discussion of for malizing the URE across depart- ments and colleges. Student Response Student responses to the URE exit survey indicated thatparticipants felt the URE beneﬁted them in other classes,Critical thinking and communication (CTC) score rubric TABLE VBiochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 472 Development of a Structured Undergraduate Research Experience  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
challenged them to think critically, improved scientiﬁc paper comprehension and writing skills, and enabled themto succeed in a lab environment. All students (8/8 in a Yes/No response) reported that the URE beneﬁted them in otherclasses, challenged them to think critically, and improved scientiﬁc paper comprehension and analysis skills. Students also conﬁrmed that they understood what was expectedand required of them in order to succeed in the lab. Futurework includes expansion of these surveys to include assess-ment of preconceived ideas of the URE and if the structuredapproach discussed here potentially inﬂuenced those ideas. Students reported “enjoying the balance between lab ﬁeld trips, presentations, journal clubs, and how-to work-shops” and feeling that “the curriculum is helpful since I sometimes procrastinate”. Field trips are classiﬁed as group outings of all lab members to explore on-campusfacilities, such as 3-D printing, protein crystallographyfacilities, and an immersive 3-D VisCube. These ﬁeld tripswere done to supplement the students’ literature review and research projects. Students found that these trips aided in increasing the camaraderie between lab members. Onestudent reported wanting more deadlines and structurebecause it helped him/her to keep track of his/her projectand scheduling. Another student stated that the URE made “great improvements” from the unstructured approach pre- viously used in our lab. Students also saw the beneﬁt of theﬁnal paper and presentation assignment. Senior studentsenjoyed presenting and leading group meetings and work-shops, indicating that it helped them “stay up-to-date onnew material and reinforce past skills”. One critical aspect of any program is asking students to participate in the reﬂection process. Reﬂection essays canbe very beneﬁcial to students and give insight into the long- term implications of the structured URE. A student who participated in the URE before and after the implementa-tion of the
structured URE. A student who participated in the URE before and after the implementa-tion of the structured URE offered the following in the sen-ior reﬂection: “My ﬁrst semester of undergraduate research, I was a jun- ior and the lab was unstructured. There was no syllabus,just show up every week and write a research paper due atthe end of the semester. I had never written a paper likethe one they expected and felt extremely lost the whole semester. The second semester they incorporated a sylla- bus, an abstract, and deadlines spread throughout the year. I was disgruntled at ﬁrst because I had enjoyed slack-ing off but I quickly realized I was better at research and less stressed by having deadlines in place. “ In developing more effective ways to aid students in progressing as research scientists, we did not want to over-step ownership that students reported needing in order tohave a beneﬁcial URE [9]. By asking students to be respon-sible for their own deliverables and projects, within thestructured framework, students reported an appreciation for the autonomy that they felt with their projects. “Overall, research has been critical to my development as a scientist and student. Organization and knowledge learnedfrom research carried over into my other classes. My lab provided all of the tools to become successful with an open door policy, informative weekly lab meetings, and organi- zation without micromanaging .” Assessment of student feedback on the implementation of the structured URE is ongoing. However, given currentstudent feedback and our ability to increase the number of undergraduate research participants while improving the quality of the research experience, we assert that ourapproach is effective and improves student outcomes. Future Considerations and Conclusions This structured URE was developed to facilitate participa- tion of more students in an authentic URE [1] in biochemis-try and use effective teaching practices in the training ofundergraduate
URE [1] in biochemis-try and use effective teaching practices in the training ofundergraduate researchers. Students want to graduatewith a marketable skill set, which in this case derives froma focus on learning the research process, experimentaltechnique, and critical thinking skills. Of the cohort of eightstudents in the 2013–2014 year, two are authors on peer- reviewed journal articles, and several students gave pre- sentations at conferences, emphasizing the balancebetween the URE being both process and outcome based.Students have reported feeling conﬁdent in their futurecareer searches and acceptance into professional/graduateschools. In addition, this structured URE addresses some ofthe pressures [13] observed in URE and provides an avenueto strengthen educational outcomes [4]. This guide for creating a student-centered, structured URE may be utilized as a method and perspective onimproving an individual lab, the departmental require-ments for undergraduate research, or a university-wideapproach to undergraduate research. This method can betranslated to other research ﬁelds. A future considerationwould be implementation and assessment in a variety ofother settings, including wet-lab, ﬁeld-study, and social sci-ence research. While many university initiatives state the desire to develop more URE programs and include more students in them, there is often a lack of guidance in termsof how faculty can manage the task. By approaching theURE as a course and laying the groundwork based oneffective pedagogy, more students can be accommodated ina quality experience. Finally, we have addressed the educa-tional gaps that sometimes plague an URE and addressedconcerns and topics of discussion set forth in the literature.We accommodated students from the ﬁrst-year to senior Brown et al. 473  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and
by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
level and utilized these varying levels of student experience in peer-to-peer mentoring. In addition, a collaborative envi-ronment was developed in order to facilitate multiple research projects and variations in the experience levels of the students. Training was independent of academic levelwith progressive development of skills in scientiﬁc writingand presentation skills, hypothesis-based experimentation,and leadership as time in the lab increased. URE are high-impact practices that are often very competitive and arelimited in terms of the number of students able to partici-pate [4]. By using the structured approach to the URE, wehave shown scalability and improved student experiences. Acknowledgement We thank the Virginia Tech College of Agriculture and LifeSciences for the Graduate Teaching Scholars Fellowship (toA.M.B.). References [1] Sadler, T. D. and McKinney, L. (2010) Scientiﬁc research for undergrad- uate students: A review of the literature. J Coll Sci Teach 39, 43. [2] Levenson, C. W. (2010) Enhancing undergraduate research in the arts and the humanities. Peer Rev 12, 13. [3] Adedokun, O. A., Parker, L. C., Childress, A., Burgess, W., Adams, R., Agnew, C. R., Leary, J., Knapp, D., Shields, C., Lelievre, S., andTeegarden, D. (2014) Effect of time on perceived gains from an under-graduate research program. CBE-Life Sci Educ 13, 139–148. [4] Linn, M. C., Palmer, E., Baranger, A., Gerard, E., and Stone, E. (2015) Undergraduate research experiences: Impacts and opportunities. Sci- ence 347, 1261757. [5] Bauer, K. W. and Bennett, J. S. (2003) Alumni perceptions used to assess undergraduate research experience. J High Educ 74, 210–230. [6] Talgar, C. P. and Goodey, N. M. (2015) Views from academia and Indus- try on skills needed for the modern research environment. Biochem Mol Biol Educ, 43, 324–332.[7] Lopatto, D. (2004) Survey of undergraduate research experiences (sure): First ﬁndings. Cell Biol Educ 3, 270–277. [8] Rasche, M. E. (2004) Outcomes of a
(sure): First ﬁndings. Cell Biol Educ 3, 270–277. [8] Rasche, M. E. (2004) Outcomes of a research-driven laboratory and liter- ature course designed to enhance undergraduate contributions to origi- nal research. Biochem Mol Biol Educ 32, 101–107. [9] Brew, A. (2013) Understanding the scope of undergraduate research: A framework for curricular and pedagogical decision-making. High Educ 66, 603–618. [10] Healey, M. (2005) Linking Research and Teaching Exploring Disciplinary Spaces and the Role of Inquiry-Based Learning. Reshaping the Univer-sity: New Relationships Between Research, Scholarship and Teaching, McGraw-Hill/Open University Press, Maidenhead, pp. 67–78. [11] Anderson, W. A. Banerjee, U. Drennan, C. L. Elgin, S. C. R. Epstein, I. R. Handelsman, J. Hatfull, G. F., Losick, R., O’Dowd, D. K., Olivera, B. M., Strobel, S. A., Walker, G. C., and Warner, I. M. (2011) Changing the cul-ture of science education at research universities. Science 331, 152–153. [12] Elsen, M. G., Visser Wijnveen, G. J., Van der Rijst, R. M., and Van Driel, J. H. (2009) How to strengthen the connection between research and teaching in undergraduate university education. High Educ Quart 63, 64–85. [13] Beckman, M. (2009) Making explicit the implicit: Deﬁning undergraduate research. Counc Undergrad Res 29, 40–44. [14] Desai, K. V., Gatson, S. N., Stiles, T. W., Stewart, R. H., Laine, G. A., and Quick, C. M. (2008) Integrating research and education at research- extensive universities with research-intensive communities. Adv Physiol Educ 32, 136–141. [15] Wood, W. B. (2003) Inquiry-based undergraduate teaching in the life sci- ences at large research universities: A perspective on the boyer com-mission report. Cell Biol Educ 2, 112–116. [16] Wagner, C., Garner, M., and Kawulich, B. (2010) The state of the art of teaching research methods in the social sciences: Towards a pedagogi- cal culture. Stud High Educ 36, 75–88. [17] Willison, J. and O’Regan, K. (2007) Commonly known, commonly not
Stud High Educ 36, 75–88. [17] Willison, J. and O’Regan, K. (2007) Commonly known, commonly not known, totally unknown: A framework for students becoming research- ers. High Educ Res Dev 26, 393–409. [18] Barlow, A. E. L. and Villarejo, M. (2004) Making a difference for minor- ities: Evaluation of an educational enrichment program. J Res Sci Teach 41, 861–881. [19] Dolan, E. and Johnson, D. (2009) Toward a holistic view of undergradu- ate research experiences: An exploratory study of impact on graduate/ postdoctoral mentors. J Sci Educ Technol 18, 487–500.Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 474 Development of a Structured Undergraduate Research Experience  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Article Anne M. Brown † Stephanie N. Lewis ‡ David R. Bevan †* From the †Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, 24061, Virginia, ‡Ofﬁce of Undergraduate Academic Affairs, VirginiaTech, Blacksburg, 24061, Virginia Abstract Participating in undergraduate research can be a pivotal expe- rience for students in life science disciplines. Development ofcritical thinking skills, in addition to conveying scientiﬁc ideas in oral and written formats, is essential to ensuring that stu- dents develop a greater understanding of basic scientiﬁcknowledge and the research process. Modernizing the current life sciences research environment to accommodate the growing demand by students for experiential learning isneeded. By developing and implementing a structured, theory-based approach to undergraduate research in the life sciences, speciﬁcally biochemistry, it has been successfullyshown that more students can be provided with a high- quality, high-impact research experience. The structure of this approach allowed students to develop novel, independentprojects in a computational molecular modeling lab. Students engaged in an experience in which career goals, problem-solving skills, time management skills, and independence in a research lab were developed. After experiencing thisapproach to undergraduate research, students reported feel- ing challenged to think critically and prepared for future career paths. The approach allowed for a progressive learning envi-ronment where more undergraduate students could partici- pate in publishable research. Future areas for development include implementation in a bench-top lab and extension todisciplines beyond biochemistry. In this study, it has been shown that utilizing the structured approach to undergraduate research could allow for more students to experience under-graduate research and develop into more conﬁdent, inde- pendent life scientists well prepared for graduate schools and professional research environments. VC2016 --- life scientists well prepared for graduate schools and professional research environments. VC2016 by The Interna- tional Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 44(5):463–474, 2016. Keywords: undergraduate research; mentoring; high-impact activities; development and implementation Introduction Participation in an engaging undergraduate research expe- rience (URE) can be an invaluable opportunity for under-graduate students to develop both academic and professio- nal skills [1]. Undergraduate student researchers, deﬁned as undergraduates who choose to participate in the scien-tiﬁc research process to gain experience and inform career goals traditionally in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), can have a variety of experiences and outcomes. The implications of a research experience now extend to areas of medicine, business, and the arts as well [2]. While summer research experiences provide anabbreviated but in-depth exposure to the research process, greater beneﬁts and gains have been observed in yearlong UREs, highlighting a need for more students to become involved in undergraduate research during the academic year [3]. However, increasing undergraduate student par-ticipation places a greater burden on faculty time and resources, ultimately leading to a small number of students in a given lab and increased competition for yearlong UREs[4]. In addition, little change or development in the basic structure and curriculum related to undergraduate research has been reported in the past decade, especially in the biomedical research environment [5, 6], despite the trend in technological advances and professional needs inthe research arena. There is a need to increase the numberVolume 44, Number 5, September/October 2016, Pages 463–474 Abbreviations: URE, undergraduate research experience; STEM, science, technology, engineering, and mathematics; URT, undergradu- ate research trainee; SURS, senior undergraduate research student; PI, principal --- URT, undergradu- ate research trainee; SURS, senior undergraduate research student; PI, principal investigator; GRM, graduate research mentor; CTC, critical thinking and research communication skills *Address for correspondence: 201 Fralin Life Sciences Center, Blacksburg, VA 24061. E-mail: drbevan@vt.edu Received 11 September 2015; Revised 30 January 2016; Accepted 3 March 2016 DOI 10.1002/bmb.20975 Published online 28 April 2016 in Wiley Online Library(wileyonlinelibrary.com)Development of a Structured Undergraduate Research Experience: Framework and Implications Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 463
of students participating an academic year URE and to develop the URE to better ﬁt skill-sets needed in a biomedi-cal research environment and post-graduate education. There is a shift toward the mindset that UREs need to focus more on student interpretation of results and developmentof critical thinking skills, in addition to mastery of experi-mental techniques [4]. However, assessment of skills, level of competency gained, and overall perceptions from the URE are not well studied and often lack pedagogical back-ing [5]. In order to advance the state of UREs and improve student outcomes, a new approach is required to meet the growing demand from students and university initiatives.The presented approach identiﬁes increased student partic- ipation and higher-level engagement as room for improve- ment in an URE and shows that with a structured,pedagogical-based approach to URE, more students areable to participate in the URE and develop both research methods and critical thinking skills at a higher level than before implementation. Implications for Increased Student Participation in an URE Studies suggest that UREs are high-impact activities that improve the educational outcomes of students who partici-pate [7]. This suggestion is also supported by studentresponses from an alumni feedback survey, which foundthat students who participated in UREs reported higher sat-isfaction and overall personal growth as compared withthose who did not participate [5]. Additionally, studentswho participated in novel research exploration derived agreater understanding and appreciation for the researchprocess and application of basic science knowledge, whilecontributing something worthwhile to the scientiﬁc commu-nity [8]. Depending on the type of institution and goals ofthe department curriculum, there are multiple approachesto undergraduate research. These approaches have been detailed and state the variety of beneﬁts for having students being both active and passive in the URE, [9, --- and state the variety of beneﬁts for having students being both active and passive in the URE, [9, 10] and howUREs can ﬁt into the curriculum in a variety of ways. Current Obstacles Teaching and research are often isolated endeavors atresearch universities [11]. As described by Elsen et al . (2009), if universities strengthen their “research-teachingnexus,” then more students will be able to participate inthe URE, regardless of discipline [12]. Healey (2005) pro-posed that there are two main focus areas in most UREs,with the experience usually favoring one rather than both.A focus on content in an URE is geared more toward writ-ten and oral presentation deliverables, while a focus onresearch process is attentive to student engagement in allparts of the research cycle with students leading and designing experiments [10]. Furthermore, there is a need to address the pressures surrounding undergraduate research, as deﬁned by Beck- man and Hensel [13]. Such pressures include the URE beingeither student initiated or faculty initiated, biased at studentlevels (ﬁrst-year vs. senior, honors vs. non-honors students),and focusing on either the process or products of researchrather than learning outcomes. In addition, universities often lack the resources to involve a majority of the undergraduate population in undergraduate research [14, 15]. The ratio oftotal student population to number of available lab positions,which is based on materials, lab space, mentoring capacity,and number of projects, translates to a small percentage ofstudents who can participate in an engaging URE for an extended period of time. With these obstacles present in most undergraduate research programs at both the departmentaland university level, we sought to explore a method thatwould address both sides of the pressures mentioned aboveas related to the life sciences ﬁeld. The promotion of similar teaching pedagogies across dis- ciplines and better discourse on how to improve the overallundergraduate
pedagogies across dis- ciplines and better discourse on how to improve the overallundergraduate research environment in the life sciences canbe achieved [9]. Training effective and successful junior research scientists should incorporate independent research projects and reﬂective discussions on how students learn inorder to improve the efﬁcacy of the research training experi-ence and the perceptions of the students regarding that expe-rience [11]. Conversations with students regarding theirexpectations for research experiences in the biochemistry ﬁeld led to the development of a program within the Bevan Molecular Modeling Lab at Virginia Tech, which is a research-intensive university. These conversations provided insight intothe varying experiences across campus for undergraduatestudents. The responses were in alignment with reports thatstated that students had difﬁculty learning research methodol- ogy and that varying levels of autonomy greatly inﬂuenced the URE [16, 17]. In order to fully prepare students for their nextcareer stage, students needed to participate in both focusareas proposed by Healy [10]. To this end, concepts in educa-tional theory should be incorporated into the URE and under-lay the basis of our framework for increasing the number of students participating in a high-quality URE. The purpose for developing this structured practice and framework was toprovide a consistent, individualized, self-sustaining researchexperience that trains undergraduates to become independ-ent researchers in the life science ﬁelds. Development of an URE Framework to Increase Student Participation andImprove Experience Outcomes The purpose of this article is to discuss the method of implementation of a student-centered research program inBiochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 464 Development of a Structured Undergraduate Research Experience  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva
5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License --- by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
an individual lab that is backed in theory by a student- centered framework [9]. We sought to increase the number of students participating in a high-quality URE. In ourreport, a high-quality URE experience is determined both by student feedback and analysis of critical thinking skills presented in ﬁnal deliverables as determined by professio-nals in the ﬁeld. In addition, we provide resources and detailed discussion of such implementation of a student- centered research program and how it can be implementedon the individual lab, departmental, and college-wide lev- els. The Bevan Molecular Modeling lab has been estab- lished as an environment for computational modeling thatencourages collaboration with experimental labs. Molecu- lar modeling techniques have increasingly been recognized as a means to predict biological outcomes and elucidatedetails at an atomistic level. The lab participates in many collaborative projects involving therapeutic drug discovery and development for cancer, allergies, and chronic inﬂam-matory diseases. The breadth of projects and speed of the techniques makes the lab perfectly poised to provide a 1- to 2-year research experience for undergraduates. Projectscan be easily divided into segments that can be accom- plished by a single student, a group of students, or a series of students over longer periods of time. The established col-laborative environment is conducive to assembling the pro- posed URE structure. In order to address the obstacles described above and to engage more students in a student-centered URE in the life sciences ﬁeld, the model introduced and described by Brew in 2013 [9] was used as a template. Adjustments tothe design included incorporation of students at all aca- demic levels (ﬁrst-year to senior) into the URE and estab- lishing autonomy in the laboratory across the levels. Inaddition, various pedagogical-based implementations were made, speciﬁcally related to learning objectives and assess- ment. Explicit attention
were made, speciﬁcally related to learning objectives and assess- ment. Explicit attention to implementation and assessmentof curricular and pedagogical goals needs to be determined before any type of implementation of an URE. By informing the students of the accepted practices, purpose and goals ofthe URE, the individual lab/department/college can better meet the educational needs and expectations of students who would be apprehensive of such experiences. Establish-ing a self-sustaining, self-propagating lab environment allows students to become experts who can in turn train more students in the lab. At the onset of the implementation of this framework, the “structured” approach came from the idea that stu- dents are accustomed to course syllabi and the standar-dized outline for courses. At the start of every semester, all courses disseminate a syllabus that gives the student a timeline with course expectations. However, this practice isoften neglected for an URE because it is not a traditional course or course environment. Most undergraduate institu- tions utilize a system in which undergraduate research isdone for credit and graded (A–F). While it is necessary tobe mindful of different strategies to assess undergraduate research across disciplines, establishment of a standard approach for the department, especially related to assess-ment, will beneﬁt students and set a baseline for learning outcomes and graded assignments [9]. A standard set of expectations across a department/discipline, which is com-mon practice for traditional courses, would negate varia- tions in expectations while improving learning outcomes. In this regard, we have structured the approach to under-graduate research to be consistent with a typical course format while maintaining elements that make the URE autonomous, student centered, and focused on developmentof skills related to critical thinking, oral presentation, andwritten dissemination of scientiﬁc work. The following sec- tions
thinking, oral presentation, andwritten dissemination of scientiﬁc work. The following sec- tions breakdown the structured URE developed to increase student participating and engagement. These sections pro-vide detailed rationale for incorporation into the URE. Syllabus When developing the syllabus, the ﬁrst goal was to moveaway from an unstructured research experience, which isdeﬁned as students working in a lab on an individual pro- ject with no explicit knowledge of learning objectives, grad- ing system, or overall timeline. A syllabus was establishedto eliminate “unknowns” for the students. The syllabus was structured to allow students to have the experience of exe- cuting independent research projects and partaking inresearch process workshops. Learning objectives were stated (Table I), and a breakdown of graded elements and assessment methods, deadlines for deliverables, and detailson weekly workshops were provided. A lab objective was stated for the URE and gave stu- dents perspective into the types of approaches used and theoverall research focus for the lab. “Undergraduate research experience for students in their freshman, sophomore, junior, and senior years of study. Bevan Lab focuses on using computational biology and bio- informatics techniques, including molecular dynamics,molecular docking, homology modeling, and biomolecularvisualization, to understand protein structure and dynam- ics, and aid in novel drug design.” The learning objectives for the course were also dis- cussed and related to both the individual projects of the stu- dents and the deliverables each student was expected tosubmit to the graduate students and PI. All assignmentswere used to assess progression of learning and retention of research process as well as individual project knowledge. A proposed agenda of the weekly group meetings was also included in the syllabus and gave students the oppor- tunity to see what topics would be discussed, plan their presentation dates, and have
the oppor- tunity to see what topics would be discussed, plan their presentation dates, and have input into what topics arepresented at the weekly workshop sessions. Deliverables, Brown et al. 465  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Learning objectives for participants and mentors in the URE Investor Learning objective Assessment Undergraduate Research Trainee (URT)Learn basic research practices. Participation in weekly workshops. Progress toward completion of independent research project.Weekly check-in meetings with GRM and PI. Maintain a lab notebook. Research notebook checks at weekly meetings. Present scientiﬁc ﬁndings in written format. Check point documents during semester: Abstract, Introduction, and Final paper. Present scientiﬁc ﬁndings in oral format. Final research presentation at the end of the semester.Critique oral presentations of peers. Peer evaluation rubrics completed during presentations.Collaborate with peers in lab. Weekly check-in meetings with GRM and PI. Senior Undergraduate Research Student (SURS)Learn basic research practices. Participation in weekly workshops and presentation of one workshop. Progress toward completion of independent research project.Weekly check-in meetings with GRM and PI. Maintain a lab notebook. Research notebook checks at weekly meetings. Present scientiﬁc ﬁndings in written format. Check point documents during semester: Abstract, Introduction, and Final paper. Present scientiﬁc ﬁndings in oral format. Final research presentation at the end of the semester.Critique oral presentations of peers. Peer evaluation rubrics completed during presentations.Collaborate with peers in lab. Discussions with SURS about research progress. Develop mentoring skills. Discussions with SURS about mentoring techniques. Present at a research symposium. Compose and present a research poster at university undergraduate research symposium. Graduate Research Mentor (GRM)Develop mentoring skills. Conversations with PI about mentoring techniques. Participate in mentoring workshops at the university or at conferences. Manage projects and personnel. Progression of research projects by URTs and SURS in the lab. Develop teaching style. Coursework in pedagogy courses and/or --- was given to students in order to improve their base knowl- edge on techniques and jargon in the ﬁeld. Potential topics for other lab environments could include review of titra-tions and making buffer solutions, mass spectrometry, and high-performance liquid chromatography. By presenting this information to the group and allowing for discussionswhere questions about the topics can be addressed, more students beneﬁt than in one-on-one conversations detailing these techniques. Once the general framework for the URE is established, the workload for implementation becomes very managea- ble. One critique of establishing a single agenda to bereused over multiple years is that some students will redundantly experience the same topics multiple times. In the URE implemented and discussed here, studentsreported enjoying multiple workshops on the same topic because it helped them master the skill. In addition, senior students in the lab can lead workshops, thereby givingthem the ability to develop a deeper mastery of the subject. The usage of senior students in the teaching process can also lead to positive peer-to-peer mentoring relationshipsin a collaborative environment. Mentorship Undergraduate research students were broken down intosubset groups based on level and duration in the lab:undergraduate research trainee (URT) and senior under- graduate researcher (SUR). Each student level had speciﬁc learning objectives and deliverables that focused on theprogression of the student’s own undergraduate research project, the development of scientiﬁc writing and presenta- tion skills, and mentoring (Table I). Graduate research stu-dents were also included as a group, classiﬁed as graduate research mentor (GRM). In this URE, SURs mentored URTs, graduate students mentored both levels of undergraduatestudents, and the PI mentored all students (graduate and undergraduate). An added beneﬁt to this mentoring frame- work is that the research experience and mentoring sup-port from both
projects by URTs and SURS in the lab. Develop teaching style. Coursework in pedagogy courses and/or workshops at the university or at conferences. Learn pedagogical practices. Each investor (column 1) participates in research following a list of learning objectives (column 2) and is assessed (column 3) continuously through out the semester.TABLE IBiochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 466 Development of a Structured Undergraduate Research Experience  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
such as the ﬁnal paper and ﬁnal presentation, required the generation of grading rubrics (Tables II and III), whichwere provided to students at the beginning of the semester.Providing the rubrics early conveyed clear expectations with established grading metrics. This aided in the stu-dents’ progression throughout the semester and improvedGrading rubric to assess content of URE ﬁnal papers TABLE II Brown et al. 467  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
the quality of their check-in deliverables (e.g., the abstract and introduction section for the ﬁnal paper turned in half way through the semester). We also sought to maintain ele-ments in our rubrics that would be essential to students inother molecular biology and biochemistry courses. Some elements that were easily transferable to other coursework were the use of proper citations, development of a scientiﬁcvoice, and practice in writing the methods sections ofGrading rubric for URE ﬁnal presentations TABLE IIIBiochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 468 Development of a Structured Undergraduate Research Experience  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
manuscripts. Such skills are required for courses and asso- ciated labs, and tied their experiences in the research lab to experiences in their traditional core courses. Grading and Assessment A section on grading and assessment was added to the syl- labus for two reasons. The ﬁrst reason was to provide the student with a clear understanding of expectations for theURE and what would constitute the grade received at the end of the semester. Secondly, setting comprehensive expectations would allow for grade equality regardless ofacademic level and number of credits enrolled for the URE. If a student is not performing as expected, the faculty has a clear “contract” with the student indicating what a studentshould expect to gain from working with the faculty mem- ber and his/her lab. If there are issues in participation and performance, these issues can be quantiﬁed as a grade,which students are accustomed to interpreting as an assessment of their skills development process. In the URE discussed here, the grade distribution was as follows: Notebook Documentation (20%), Participation in lab and lab meetings (20%), Final Presentation (30%) and Final Paper (30%). Participation was deﬁned as“attendance at all group lab meetings, substantial progress on individual research projects, and clear communication with mentors on any issues.” The inclusion of participationin the grade clearly conveyed the level of effort needed to fully contribute to the URE and see academic and professio- nal gains. The deliverables require proﬁciency in the research process (i.e., writing, discussion, methodology, and data analysis), understanding of project-speciﬁc biological facts,and critical thinking in the research process. These deliver- ables provide the foundation of combining the multiple lev- els of an URE as discussed in the Current Obstacles section.This learning process and assessment is denoted in thegrading rubrics provided for the ﬁnal paper and ﬁnal pre- sentation assignments
is denoted in thegrading rubrics provided for the ﬁnal paper and ﬁnal pre- sentation assignments (Tables II and III). As a complete document, the syllabus addresses the goals of UREs: stu- dents should be held accountable for the critical thinking aspects of the project and the methodological skills devel- opment necessary to become well-rounded scientists of the future [4]. Group Meetings Weekly lab group meetings focused on honing research process skills while providing a platform for students to practice oral presentation skills. The weekly workshop allowed for the dissemination of key information related to the progression of the student in a manner that would require minimal repetition by the PI. For example, instead of detailing how to write an abstract for students in a one-on-one meeting, all students participate in a group discus- sion about the writing process. These workshops could be facilitated by a graduate student or a senior undergraduate student. Scheduling such sessions meant that interactions with the PI were reserved for individual meetings that included meaningful conversations about the progress of individual research projects. Additionally, students wereable to exhibit research process and content proﬁciency through using these presentation opportunities to prepare for honors thesis defenses and professional conferences. An example agenda is shown in Table IV with key workshop topics related to building skills in the researchprocess. Once faculty members commit to using a struc- tured approach to UREs, a standard syllabus and schedule generated for the fall and spring semesters can be used in subsequent years. Topics for workshop topics can include professional development (scientiﬁc writing and presenta- tion skills) and techniques speciﬁc to the research lab. For example, a spring workshop on a commonly used tech-nique in lab, Basics of Molecular Dynamics Simulations,Proposed schedule for fall semester Week 1 Orientation: syllabus,
of Molecular Dynamics Simulations,Proposed schedule for fall semester Week 1 Orientation: syllabus, introductions, questions Week 8 Graduate student presentation Week 2 Lab notebooks, research goals, ﬁle organization Week 9 Graduate student presentation Week 3 Predatory reading, How to write Abstracts & Intros, Journal club paper assignedWeek 10 Undergraduate Presentations (3) Week 4 How to give a good presentation Week 11 Undergraduate Presentations (3) Week 5 Journal Club – based on paper assigned week 3 Week 12 Undergraduate Presentations (3) Week 6 Fall Break Week 13 Undergraduate Presentations (3) Week 7 Peer review of Abstracts/Intros Week 14 FINAL PAPERS DUETABLE IV Brown et al. 469  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
to this mentoring frame- work is that the research experience and mentoring sup-port from both principal investigators (PIs) and graduate students is thought to be supportive of women and minority students, giving them access to faculty and peers in theﬁeld [18]. Our structure allows graduate and undergraduate stu- dents in the sciences to beneﬁt both academically and pro-fessionally from a research mentoring relationship. It was important to the development of this URE to include gradu- ate students as research mentors in order to provide careerpreparation, teaching, and communication skills develop- ment. In the role of research mentor, graduate students have the opportunity to discuss and develop pedagogicaltechniques relating to teaching undergraduate students about research methods. The beneﬁts of being a mentor and mentee for both undergraduate and graduate studentshas been explored previously [19] and was observed in stu-dent feedback from our preliminary study. The undergrad- uate mentee sees senior undergraduates as peers who have achieved a breadth of knowledge in their major thatthey may aspire to achieve. The senior undergraduate mentor gains mentoring experience while achieving an increased level of understanding of a scientiﬁc subject (e.g.biochemistry). The graduate student as a mentor partici- pates in practical training for effective research mentoring and project management. The graduate student presentshis/her research to the undergraduate students, which serve as an example to the undergraduate students of graduate level achievement while providing the chance forprofessional development. As a mentee, the graduate stu- dent is able to explore career option conversations with the PI to assess how working with undergraduate researcherscan add to his/her professional skill set. The PI maintains the beneﬁts of providing UREs to more students, training and graduating research-focused undergraduates, potentialmatriculation of undergraduates into
and graduating research-focused undergraduates, potentialmatriculation of undergraduates into graduate programs at the home institution, and graduating pre-doctoral candi- dates prepared to succeed as science professionals. Effectiveness of Structured URE Assessment of Scalability and Improved Student Outcomes As the students progress through the semester, the learn- ing process should ensure that the ﬁnal product for the semester is a reﬂection of how much a student has advanced in learning the research process. The UREmethod presented was tested on a small pilot group of eight participants during the fall semester of 2013. This group of students was selected for survey because half had beenmembers of the lab before the implementation of this method and other students were new to the lab as of fall 2013 (deﬁned as pre- and post- implementation). Surveyswere given to all students who participated in the URE dur- ing the 2013–2014 academic year. Survey questions were composed to determine if the URE inﬂuenced academicperformance in core courses, gain feedback on changes related to critical thinking, assess gains in scientiﬁc paper comprehension and analysis, assess progression in scien-tiﬁc writing and presentation skills, and gauge comprehen- sion of project background and scope. Analyses on the out- comes for this URE are based on qualitative methods andreview of student survey data, in addition to outside review of student deliverables pre- and post- implementation of this structured method. Taken together, these analysis met-rics provided valuable insight regarding the effectiveness of the structured approach. The preliminary observational study discussed in this article was conducted on achieved student deliverables. The student artifacts were obtained prior to establishing a need for research data on a structured method. As themethod was developed and a need to quantitatively assessBiochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 470 Development of a Structured --- effectiveness arose, it was determined that approval for work with human subjects should be obtained. The reﬂec- tion questionnaire and purpose for formalizing the collec- tion of additional student data were submitted to the insti-tutional review board (IRB) for human-subject researchand was approved for further data collection (IRB# 14- 680). The posed reﬂection questions about the student experience were made a part of the reﬂection process for SURs, and student deliverables were scored for data collec- tion after students completed their UREs. Of the deliverables completed by each student each semester, the ﬁnal papers are the strongest indicator of the scientiﬁc work completed and knowledge gained from the provided experiences. The ﬁnal papers were used as a tool to assess the development of critical thinking and research communication skills (CTC) (Table V). A score was assigned to a subset of the papers submitted by students who were in the lab during the transition to the updated URE approach (Fig. 2 A) and two groups of students who were in the lab either before or after the transition (Fig. 2 B). We saw an increasing trend in CTC score in both groups of data. We also calculated a statistically signiﬁcant difference between the before and after scores. These data considered together suggest that students perform at a higher level of proﬁciency, as determined by outside review, under the updated URE structure. Finally, another measure of effec- tiveness for this URE approach is the ability to accommo- date an increased number of participating undergraduate students compared with our previous approach. Between 2010 and 2015, we were able to increase participation from 4 to 15 undergraduates ranging from ﬁrst-year stu- dents to seniors, an increase of almost three-fold over 5 years (Fig. 1). In addition, we were able to increase thenumber of students presenting research at professional conferences and co-authoring peer-reviewed publications (Fig. 1). The
quantitatively assessBiochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 470 Development of a Structured Undergraduate Research Experience  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
research at professional conferences and co-authoring peer-reviewed publications (Fig. 1). The method discussed in this ar ticle was ﬁrst implemented in 2013 as an update to previous practices that worked for jun- ior- and senior-level students on a small scale. We saw the need to also open up research opportunities for ﬁrst-year Comparison of critical thinking and communication (CTC) sco res. The CTC score is based on an assessment rubric applied to the ﬁnal papers submitted by students. Each paper was scored by three individuals and the average scores are reported here. ( A) Scores for the same student (each line) before and after implementation of the proposed method ( N52). (B) Scores for different students (each circle) before and after implementation of the proposed method ( N54). Standard devia- tion for each point is represented by an I-shaped error bars. The asterisk (*) represents statistical signiﬁcance (Student’s t test, p<0.05). [Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.] Quantiﬁed outcomes of structured UREs. The fre- quency (y-axis) of students in each category per cohort year (x-axis), where the number students for a given year ( blue bars ), number of students participating in conference ( green bars ), and num- ber of students listed as authors on peer-reviewed publications ( gray ) are shown. The number of publications includes manuscripts that have been published, submitted, and that are in preparation.[Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.] FIG 2FIG 1 Brown et al. 471  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
students who are interested in pursuing research and are just starting their college careers. The peer-mentoring component h a sp r o v e nu s e f u lf o rh e l p i n gs u c hs t u d e n t sd ow e l li nt h e i rb i o -chemistry courses. The combinat ion of all URE initiatives in the lab allowed us to accommodate the registration of 13 under- graduate students for the URE in Fall 2015 and 15 students inSpring 2016. While the maximum number of students we can accommodate in productive res earch projects has not yet been reached, and we are unsure of that number, by implementingthe structured approach for URE, we were able to easily give more students an enriching research experience. It is recom- mended that scaling occur slowly in labs that wish to imple-ment this method in order to effectively establish the peer net-work and better manage the increased number of students. Therefore, with the usage of this method, we were able to scalet h er e s e a r c hl a bt oa c c o m m o d a t em o r es t u d e n t s ,i m p r o v et h e tangible outcomes of the student s URE (Fig. 1), improve the crit- ical thinking and communication skills of the students (Fig. 2),and start the discussion of for malizing the URE across depart- ments and colleges. Student Response Student responses to the URE exit survey indicated thatparticipants felt the URE beneﬁted them in other classes,Critical thinking and communication (CTC) score rubric TABLE VBiochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 472 Development of a Structured Undergraduate Research Experience  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
challenged them to think critically, improved scientiﬁc paper comprehension and writing skills, and enabled themto succeed in a lab environment. All students (8/8 in a Yes/No response) reported that the URE beneﬁted them in otherclasses, challenged them to think critically, and improved scientiﬁc paper comprehension and analysis skills. Students also conﬁrmed that they understood what was expectedand required of them in order to succeed in the lab. Futurework includes expansion of these surveys to include assess-ment of preconceived ideas of the URE and if the structuredapproach discussed here potentially inﬂuenced those ideas. Students reported “enjoying the balance between lab ﬁeld trips, presentations, journal clubs, and how-to work-shops” and feeling that “the curriculum is helpful since I sometimes procrastinate”. Field trips are classiﬁed as group outings of all lab members to explore on-campusfacilities, such as 3-D printing, protein crystallographyfacilities, and an immersive 3-D VisCube. These ﬁeld tripswere done to supplement the students’ literature review and research projects. Students found that these trips aided in increasing the camaraderie between lab members. Onestudent reported wanting more deadlines and structurebecause it helped him/her to keep track of his/her projectand scheduling. Another student stated that the URE made “great improvements” from the unstructured approach pre- viously used in our lab. Students also saw the beneﬁt of theﬁnal paper and presentation assignment. Senior studentsenjoyed presenting and leading group meetings and work-shops, indicating that it helped them “stay up-to-date onnew material and reinforce past skills”. One critical aspect of any program is asking students to participate in the reﬂection process. Reﬂection essays canbe very beneﬁcial to students and give insight into the long- term implications of the structured URE. A student who participated in the URE before and after the implementa-tion of the
structured URE. A student who participated in the URE before and after the implementa-tion of the structured URE offered the following in the sen-ior reﬂection: “My ﬁrst semester of undergraduate research, I was a jun- ior and the lab was unstructured. There was no syllabus,just show up every week and write a research paper due atthe end of the semester. I had never written a paper likethe one they expected and felt extremely lost the whole semester. The second semester they incorporated a sylla- bus, an abstract, and deadlines spread throughout the year. I was disgruntled at ﬁrst because I had enjoyed slack-ing off but I quickly realized I was better at research and less stressed by having deadlines in place. “ In developing more effective ways to aid students in progressing as research scientists, we did not want to over-step ownership that students reported needing in order tohave a beneﬁcial URE [9]. By asking students to be respon-sible for their own deliverables and projects, within thestructured framework, students reported an appreciation for the autonomy that they felt with their projects. “Overall, research has been critical to my development as a scientist and student. Organization and knowledge learnedfrom research carried over into my other classes. My lab provided all of the tools to become successful with an open door policy, informative weekly lab meetings, and organi- zation without micromanaging .” Assessment of student feedback on the implementation of the structured URE is ongoing. However, given currentstudent feedback and our ability to increase the number of undergraduate research participants while improving the quality of the research experience, we assert that ourapproach is effective and improves student outcomes. Future Considerations and Conclusions This structured URE was developed to facilitate participa- tion of more students in an authentic URE [1] in biochemis-try and use effective teaching practices in the training ofundergraduate
URE [1] in biochemis-try and use effective teaching practices in the training ofundergraduate researchers. Students want to graduatewith a marketable skill set, which in this case derives froma focus on learning the research process, experimentaltechnique, and critical thinking skills. Of the cohort of eightstudents in the 2013–2014 year, two are authors on peer- reviewed journal articles, and several students gave pre- sentations at conferences, emphasizing the balancebetween the URE being both process and outcome based.Students have reported feeling conﬁdent in their futurecareer searches and acceptance into professional/graduateschools. In addition, this structured URE addresses some ofthe pressures [13] observed in URE and provides an avenueto strengthen educational outcomes [4]. This guide for creating a student-centered, structured URE may be utilized as a method and perspective onimproving an individual lab, the departmental require-ments for undergraduate research, or a university-wideapproach to undergraduate research. This method can betranslated to other research ﬁelds. A future considerationwould be implementation and assessment in a variety ofother settings, including wet-lab, ﬁeld-study, and social sci-ence research. While many university initiatives state the desire to develop more URE programs and include more students in them, there is often a lack of guidance in termsof how faculty can manage the task. By approaching theURE as a course and laying the groundwork based oneffective pedagogy, more students can be accommodated ina quality experience. Finally, we have addressed the educa-tional gaps that sometimes plague an URE and addressedconcerns and topics of discussion set forth in the literature.We accommodated students from the ﬁrst-year to senior Brown et al. 473  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and
level and utilized these varying levels of student experience in peer-to-peer mentoring. In addition, a collaborative envi-ronment was developed in order to facilitate multiple research projects and variations in the experience levels of the students. Training was independent of academic levelwith progressive development of skills in scientiﬁc writingand presentation skills, hypothesis-based experimentation,and leadership as time in the lab increased. URE are high-impact practices that are often very competitive and arelimited in terms of the number of students able to partici-pate [4]. By using the structured approach to the URE, wehave shown scalability and improved student experiences. Acknowledgement We thank the Virginia Tech College of Agriculture and LifeSciences for the Graduate Teaching Scholars Fellowship (toA.M.B.). References [1] Sadler, T. D. and McKinney, L. (2010) Scientiﬁc research for undergrad- uate students: A review of the literature. J Coll Sci Teach 39, 43. [2] Levenson, C. W. (2010) Enhancing undergraduate research in the arts and the humanities. Peer Rev 12, 13. [3] Adedokun, O. A., Parker, L. C., Childress, A., Burgess, W., Adams, R., Agnew, C. R., Leary, J., Knapp, D., Shields, C., Lelievre, S., andTeegarden, D. (2014) Effect of time on perceived gains from an under-graduate research program. CBE-Life Sci Educ 13, 139–148. [4] Linn, M. C., Palmer, E., Baranger, A., Gerard, E., and Stone, E. (2015) Undergraduate research experiences: Impacts and opportunities. Sci- ence 347, 1261757. [5] Bauer, K. W. and Bennett, J. S. (2003) Alumni perceptions used to assess undergraduate research experience. J High Educ 74, 210–230. [6] Talgar, C. P. and Goodey, N. M. (2015) Views from academia and Indus- try on skills needed for the modern research environment. Biochem Mol Biol Educ, 43, 324–332.[7] Lopatto, D. (2004) Survey of undergraduate research experiences (sure): First ﬁndings. Cell Biol Educ 3, 270–277. [8] Rasche, M. E. (2004) Outcomes of a
(sure): First ﬁndings. Cell Biol Educ 3, 270–277. [8] Rasche, M. E. (2004) Outcomes of a research-driven laboratory and liter- ature course designed to enhance undergraduate contributions to origi- nal research. Biochem Mol Biol Educ 32, 101–107. [9] Brew, A. (2013) Understanding the scope of undergraduate research: A framework for curricular and pedagogical decision-making. High Educ 66, 603–618. [10] Healey, M. (2005) Linking Research and Teaching Exploring Disciplinary Spaces and the Role of Inquiry-Based Learning. Reshaping the Univer-sity: New Relationships Between Research, Scholarship and Teaching, McGraw-Hill/Open University Press, Maidenhead, pp. 67–78. [11] Anderson, W. A. Banerjee, U. Drennan, C. L. Elgin, S. C. R. Epstein, I. R. Handelsman, J. Hatfull, G. F., Losick, R., O’Dowd, D. K., Olivera, B. M., Strobel, S. A., Walker, G. C., and Warner, I. M. (2011) Changing the cul-ture of science education at research universities. Science 331, 152–153. [12] Elsen, M. G., Visser Wijnveen, G. J., Van der Rijst, R. M., and Van Driel, J. H. (2009) How to strengthen the connection between research and teaching in undergraduate university education. High Educ Quart 63, 64–85. [13] Beckman, M. (2009) Making explicit the implicit: Deﬁning undergraduate research. Counc Undergrad Res 29, 40–44. [14] Desai, K. V., Gatson, S. N., Stiles, T. W., Stewart, R. H., Laine, G. A., and Quick, C. M. (2008) Integrating research and education at research- extensive universities with research-intensive communities. Adv Physiol Educ 32, 136–141. [15] Wood, W. B. (2003) Inquiry-based undergraduate teaching in the life sci- ences at large research universities: A perspective on the boyer com-mission report. Cell Biol Educ 2, 112–116. [16] Wagner, C., Garner, M., and Kawulich, B. (2010) The state of the art of teaching research methods in the social sciences: Towards a pedagogi- cal culture. Stud High Educ 36, 75–88. [17] Willison, J. and O’Regan, K. (2007) Commonly known, commonly not
Stud High Educ 36, 75–88. [17] Willison, J. and O’Regan, K. (2007) Commonly known, commonly not known, totally unknown: A framework for students becoming research- ers. High Educ Res Dev 26, 393–409. [18] Barlow, A. E. L. and Villarejo, M. (2004) Making a difference for minor- ities: Evaluation of an educational enrichment program. J Res Sci Teach 41, 861–881. [19] Dolan, E. and Johnson, D. (2009) Toward a holistic view of undergradu- ate research experiences: An exploratory study of impact on graduate/ postdoctoral mentors. J Sci Educ Technol 18, 487–500.Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 474 Development of a Structured Undergraduate Research Experience  15393429, 2016, 5, Downloaded from https://iubmb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bmb.20975 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [15/06/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
El artículo de Anne M. Brown, Stephanie N. Lewis y David R. Bevan, del Departamento de Bioquímica de Virginia Tech, se centra en la relevancia de las Experiencias de Investigación de Pregrado (URE) en las ciencias de la vida, subrayando su papel en el desarrollo de habilidades críticas y en la comunicación científica. Los autores argumentan que es esencial modernizar el entorno de investigación para satisfacer la creciente demanda de experiencias prácticas por parte de los estudiantes.

Se propone un enfoque estructurado y teórico para la investigación de pregrado en bioquímica, que ha demostrado ser eficaz en la provisión de experiencias de investigación de alta calidad. Este modelo permite a los estudiantes desarrollar proyectos independientes en un laboratorio de modelado molecular computacional, promoviendo habilidades como la gestión del tiempo y la resolución de problemas. Los resultados indican que los estudiantes se sienten más desafiados a pensar críticamente y están mejor preparados para sus futuras carreras, además de que se fomenta un ambiente de aprendizaje que facilita la participación en investigaciones publicables.

El artículo también define a los investigadores de pregrado como aquellos que participan en la investigación científica para adquirir experiencia y definir sus objetivos profesionales, abarcando diversas disciplinas más allá de STEM. Se destaca que las URE de un año ofrecen mayores beneficios que las experiencias de verano, lo que resalta la necesidad de involucrar a más estudiantes durante el año académico. Sin embargo, el aumento de la participación estudiantil presenta desafíos en términos de tiempo y recursos para los profesores.

A pesar de los avances tecnológicos, el artículo señala que ha habido poco cambio en la estructura y el currículo de la investigación de pregrado en la última década, especialmente en el ámbito biomédico. Por lo tanto, se enfatiza la necesidad de aumentar la participación estudiantil en la investigación de pregrado para formar científicos más seguros e independientes, bien preparados para la educación de posgrado y entornos de investigación profesional.

Se propone un nuevo enfoque que enfatiza la participación estudiantil y un mayor compromiso en las URE, lo que permite a más estudiantes desarrollar tanto métodos de investigación como habilidades de pensamiento crítico. Las URE son consideradas actividades de alto impacto que mejoran los resultados educativos, respaldadas por encuestas a exalumnos que indican mayor satisfacción y crecimiento personal entre quienes participaron en ellas.

El texto también discute cómo las instituciones pueden integrar la investigación de pregrado en sus currículos, destacando los beneficios de tener estudiantes activos y pasivos en las URE. Sin embargo, se identifican obstáculos, como la separación entre enseñanza e investigación en las universidades, que limita la participación estudiantil. Se sugiere que fortalecer el vínculo entre investigación y enseñanza podría permitir una mayor participación en las URE.

Se identifican dos áreas de enfoque en las URE: una centrada en el contenido y otra en el proceso de investigación. Se mencionan las presiones que rodean a las URE, como la iniciativa de los estudiantes y la falta de recursos, lo que limita la participación efectiva. Se propone explorar métodos para abordar estas presiones, especialmente en ciencias de la vida, y se sugiere promover pedagogías similares en diversas disciplinas.

El texto también menciona un programa desarrollado en el Bevan Molecular Modeling Lab de Virginia Tech, que surgió de conversaciones con estudiantes sobre sus expectativas en bioquímica. Se destaca la necesidad de que los estudiantes participen en las dos áreas de enfoque propuestas por Healy, integrando conceptos de teoría educativa en las URE para aumentar la participación en experiencias de investigación de alta calidad.

El artículo se centra en la implementación de un programa de investigación centrado en el estudiante en bioquímica y biología molecular, con el objetivo de mejorar los resultados de la experiencia de investigación. Se menciona la importancia de establecer un syllabus claro que defina expectativas y objetivos de aprendizaje, así como métodos de evaluación.

Se describe un enfoque estructurado para la experiencia de investigación de pregrado, enfatizando la importancia de un syllabus que establezca objetivos de aprendizaje, métodos de evaluación y un cronograma. Este enfoque busca mejorar la participación y el compromiso de los estudiantes en la investigación científica.

El texto también aborda la evaluación de las habilidades adquiridas y las percepciones sobre las URE, sugiriendo que la creación de un enfoque estándar dentro del departamento beneficiará a los estudiantes y establecerá una base para los resultados de aprendizaje. Se propone un marco estructurado para las URE que permita una experiencia de investigación consistente y autosostenible.

Finalmente, se menciona que el URE estructurado fue desarrollado para facilitar la participación de más estudiantes en una experiencia de investigación auténtica en bioquímica, utilizando prácticas de enseñanza efectivas. Se concluye que este enfoque no solo mejora la calidad de la experiencia investigativa, sino que también promueve el desarrollo integral de habilidades esenciales para el futuro académico y profesional de los estudiantes.
