Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjog20 Journal of Geography ISSN: 0022-1341 (Print) 1752-6868 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rjog20 Kolb's Experiential Learning Theory and Its Application in Geography in Higher Education Mick Healey & Alan Jenkins To cite this article:  Mick Healey & Alan Jenkins (2000) Kolb's Experiential Learning Theory and Its Application in Geography in Higher Education, Journal of Geography, 99:5, 185-195, DOI: 10.1080/00221340008978967 To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00221340008978967 Published online: 16 Aug 2007. Submit your article to this journal  Article views: 94948 View related articles  Citing articles: 67 View citing articles
Kolb’s Experiential Learning Theory and Its  Application in Geography in Higher Education  Mick Healey and Alan Jenkins  learning is a process as well as an outcome  (Zuber-Skerritt 1992a, 103)  an understanding of learning styles is a necessary component in the  groundwork of an emancipatory pedagogy  (Fielding 1994,394)  Since the publication of his seminal book, Experiential Learning:  Experience as the Source of Learning and Development (Kolb 1984), Ameri-  can organizational psychologist David Kolb’s ideas have influenced the  work of teachers and trainers, particularly those involved with students  16 years old and upwards (Fielding 1994, Robotham 1995).  Kolb’s research provides a firm theoretical base, which is lacking in  the work of many other writers (Holman et al. 1997). According to Kolb  (1984,38), ”Learning is the process whereby knowledge is created  through the transformation of experience.” The theory presents a way  of structuring and sequencing the curriculum and indicates, in particu-  lar, how a session or entire course may be taught to improve student  learning. It suggests that learning is cyclical, involving four stages,  which, paraphrasing Kolb, may be referred to as experience, reflect,  generalize, and test (Cowan 1998). An important feature of the theory is  that the different stages are associated with distinct learning styles. Indi-  viduals differ in their preferred learning styles, and recognizing this is  the first stage in raising students’ awareness of alternative approaches  and helping them to be more flexible in meeting the varied demands of  learning situations (Gibbs 1988). Teachers also need to recognize their  own individual learning styles as a basis for the development of effec-  tive teaching and learning strategies. Learning may suffer where a  marked mismatch occurs between the style of the learner and the  approach of the teacher (Fielding 1994).  increasing emphasis on access, diversity, retention rates, and
of the teacher (Fielding 1994).  increasing emphasis on access, diversity, retention rates, and life-long  learning, there is good reason to explore the nature of different learning  styles. Indeed, given the increased recognition within geography of rec-  ognizing and valuing gender and cultural diversity, the theory is partic-  ularly relevant as ”it is rooted in a theory of learning that affirms all  major aspects of active learning, usefully accounting for an array of  individual and ... culturally derived ... differences” (Anderson and Adams  1992,25). With the expansion of higher education in many countries and the ABSTRACT  Kolb’s experiential learning theory  is one of the best known educational  theories in higher education. The theo-  ry presents a way of structuring a ses-  sion or a whole course using a learning  cycle. The different stages of the cycle  are associated with distinct learning  styles. Individuals differ in their pre-  ferred learning styles, and recognizing  this is the first stage in raising students’  awareness of the alternative approaches  possible. This article presents some case  studies of ways in which the theory can  be applied in university geography.  Key Words: learning cycles, learning  styles, Kolb’s experiential leavning theory,  learning and teaching, geography in higher  education  Mick Healey is Professor in the Geography  and Environmental Management Research  Unit, Cheltenham and Gloucester College  of Higher Education, Cheltenham GL50  4AZ, UK.  Alan Jenkins is Professor at the Oxford  Centre for Staff and Learning Develop-  ment, Oxford Rrookes University, Head-  ington, Oxford, OX3 ORP, UK.  Journal of Geography 99:185-195  02000 National Council for Geographic Education
186 Healey and Jenkins  The theory appears to offer a valid and plausi-  ble framework to many people, and it is often the  main or only theory referred to in many works on  experiential learning (Henry 1989) and geography  in higher education (at least in the UK).’ Some of  the theory’s appeal is that it provides a rationale for  a variety of learning methods, including indepen-  dent learning, learning by doing, work-based learn-  ing, and problem-based learning, which have  recently received much attention within higher edu-  cation (e.g., Gibbs 1992, Henry 1989) and geogra-  phy (e.g., Gold et al. 1991, Gravestock and Healey  1998). Moreover, the theory has a wide range of  applications in geography, including helping stu-  dents to become self-aware (e.g., Bradbeer 1999,  Geography for the New Undergraduate 1999);  assisting staff to become reflective teachers (e.g.,  Burkill et al. 2000) and students reflective learners  (Birnie and Mason O’Connor 1998); identifying stu-  dents’ learning styles (e.g., Hertzog and Lieble  1996); developing and teaching key skills (e.g.,  Chalkley and Harwood 1998, Haigh and Kilmartin  1999); designing group projects (e.g., Brown 1999,  Mellor 1991); deciding how resource-based learning  and information and communications technology  can support the learning process (e.g., Healey 1998,  Shepherd 1998); and developing the overall geogra-  phy curriculum (e.g., Jenkins 1998).2  In summary, we believe that the particular  strengths of Kolb’s theory are that it  provides ready pointers to application;  directs us to ensure that a range of teach-  ing methods is used in a course;  provides a theoretical rationale for what  many of us already do as teachers and  then offers suggestions on how to  improve on that practice (in particular  ensuring effective links between theory  and application);  makes explicit the importance of encour-  aging students to reflect and providing  them with feedback to reinforce their  learning;  supports
aging students to reflect and providing  them with feedback to reinforce their  learning;  supports us in developing a diverse,  aware classroom;  makes us aware of the way in which dif-  ferent learning styles have to be com-  bined for effective learning;  can be readily applied to all areas of the  discipline, from a GIS laboratory exercise  to a feminist analysis of a landscape;  can be used by individuals and course  teams; and can be applied widely from a single  classroom session to an entire degree  program.  In this article we have two main aims. First, we  outline the main features of Kolb’s experiential  learning theory. Second, we describe and assess  some ways in which the theory has been, or could  be, applied in geography in higher education.  The ideas we discuss are equally applicable for  learning about geography at K-12 level. Indeed, we  note how aspects of Kolb’s theory, and the peda-  gogic practices that he and others have derived  from that theory, parallel the work of Gardner  (1999), a Harvard psychologist whose theory of  multiple intelligences has had major impacts on  many K-12 teachers in the US. Both Gardner’s and  Kolb’s theories emphasize the different learning  styles of individual students and the necessity for  teachers to use a wide range of teaching methods to  meet their needs.  KOLB’S EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING THEORY  Kolb (1984), building on earlier work by Dewey  and Lewin, provides ”a comprehensive theory  which offers the foundation for an approach to edu-  cation and learning as a lifelong process and which  is soundly based in intellectual traditions of philos-  ophy and cognitive and social psychology” (Zuber-  Skerritt 1992a, 98)?  The core of Kolb’s four-stage model is a simple  description of a learning cycle that shows how  experience is translated through reflection into con-  cepts, which in turn are used as guides for active  experimentation and the choice of new experiences.  Kolb refers to these four stages as
for active  experimentation and the choice of new experiences.  Kolb refers to these four stages as concrete experi-  ence (CE), reflective observation (RO), abstract con-  ceptualization (AC), and active experimentation  (AE). They follow each other in a cycle (Figure 1).  The cycle may be entered at any point, but the  stages should be followed in sequence. The learning  cycle therefore provides feedback, which is the  basis for new action and evaluation of the conse-  quences of that action. Learners should go through  the cycle several times, so it may best be thought of  as a spiral of  cycle^.^  As its name indicates, the experiential learning  theory affirms the importance of experiential activi-  ties, such as fieldwork and laboratory sessions;  however, it does not prioritize those forms of learn-  ing. What is important is to systematically take the  learner through each stage of the cycle, ensuring  that effective links are made between each stage.
Kolb‘s Experiential Learning Theory 187  Active Experimentation (AE)  PLAN Reflective Observation (RO) 0 BS E RV E  Abstract Conceptualization (AC)  THINK  Concrete Experience:  Reflective Observation:  Abstract Conceptualization:  Active Experimentation: Where the learner is actively experiencing an activity  (e.g., a laboratory session, field class)  Where the learner is consciously reflecting back on that experience  Where the learner is being presented with/or trying to conceptualise a  theory or model of what is (to be) observed  Where the learner is trying to plan how to test a model or theory or plan  for a forthcoming experience  Figure 1. Kolb’s experiential learning cycle (based on Jenkins 11998,431).  The model offers an explicit critique of highly theo-  retical programs or courses that do not value the  prior experience or knowledge of students. It is  similarly critical of activities (e.g., certain field  courses, simulations, and games) where students  receive little preparation for the experience or no  effective chance to reflect upon the experience and  relate it to their wider reading or to the more theo-  retical aspects of the course (Jenkins 1997).  Two primary axes lie behind the cycle: an  abstract conceptualization-concrete experience  (AC-CE) dimension and an active experimenta-  tion-reflective observation (AE-RO) dimension.  These reflect the two main dimensions of the learn-  ing process that correspond to two major ways by  which we learn. The first is how we perceive or  grasp new information or experience, and the sec-  ond is how we process or transform what we per-  ceive (Smith and Kolb 1986). The way we perceive  experience ranges from immersing ourselves in the  experience-using our senses and feelings in a  ”concrete” way-to thinking ’’abstractly’’-using  logic and reason. Having perceived the experience,  we need to understand it through transforming it.  Here, individuals differ in their predilection for  doing (active
it through transforming it.  Here, individuals differ in their predilection for  doing (active experimentation) and watching  (reflective observation) (Fielding 1994). When plot- ted at right angles the two axes give four different  clusters, which may be used both to describe the  preferred learning styles of students (Figure 2) and  to identify disciplinary groupings (Figure 3).  Kolb (1984) suggests that students develop a  preference for learning in a particular way. Students  may adopt different learning styles in different situ-  ations, but they tend to favor some learning behav-  iors over others. He identifies four learning styles,  each of which is associated with a different way of  solving problems (Figure 2).  Divergers view situations from many  perspectives and rely heavily upon brain-  storming and generation of ideas.  and have the ability to create theoretical  models.  Convergers rely heavily on hypothetical-  deductive reasoning.  Accommodators carry out plans and  experiments and adapt to immediate cir-  cumstances. Assimilators use inductive reasoning  The particular choice of learning style reflects the  individual’s abilities, environment, and learning  history (Nulty and Barrett 1996). According to Kolb,
188 Healey and Jenkins  Percentile:  Concrete 0  (-27)  I  AC CE 5o AE  (Median=3.8)  Abstract I  (+29) 100 CE  Accommodator  Can carry out plans  Interested in action and results  Adapts to immediate circumstances  Trial and error style  Sets objectives  Sets schedules  (AE-RO >5.9; AC-CE ~3.8)  Converger  Good at practical applications  Makes decisions  Focuses efforts  Does well when there is one answer  Evaluates plans  Selects from alternatives  (A€-RO >5,9;AC-CE >3.8) Diverger  Imaginative, good at generating ideas  Can view situation from different angles  Open to experience  Recognizes problems  Investigates  Senses opportunities  (AE-RO ~5.9; AC-CE ~3.8)  Assimilator  Ability to create theoretical models  Compares alternatives  Defines problems  Establishes criteria  Formulates hypotheses  (A€-RO ~5.9; AC-CE >3.8)  100 50 0  Active4 AE - RO b Reflective  (+28) (Median=5.9) (-2 1)  Source: Adapted from Kolb (1984, 86) and Gibbs (1988, 20)  Note: Individual scores can be compared with the standardized percentile scores based on a mixed sample of 1,446 adults  between 18 and 60 in a survey undertaken by Kolb (1985). The average education of the sample was two years of college.  The four learning styles have scores above or below the AE-RO and AC-CE medians. Thus convergers, for example, have an  AE-RO score ~5.9 and an AC-CE score >4.3 (though any individual can only obtain an integer score), whereas divergers have  scores below these median values and often have negative scores.  Figure 2. Characteristics of Kolb's learning styles (adapted from Kolb 1984, 86 and Gibbs 1988, 20).  Accommodators  Commerce  Demography  Education  Environmental studies  Geography  Political science Public policy  Convergers  Applied economics Applied physics  Art history  Computing  Demography Engineering  Forestry Law  Medical Research Divergers  English History  Linguistics  Phi losop hy  Sociology  Assimilators  Astronomy  Chemistry  Classics  Earth sciences  Economics
Phi losop hy  Sociology  Assimilators  Astronomy  Chemistry  Classics  Earth sciences  Economics  Mathematics  Physics  Theoretical physics RO  Figure 3. Disciplinary groupings (Based on Nulty and Barrett 1996, 335).
Kolb’s Experiential Learning Theory 189  individuals learn better when subject matter is pre-  sented in a way that is consistent with their pre-  ferred learning style (Table 1).  Left to their own devices students tend to do  what is easiest for them (i.e., use their own learning  style). Similarly, individual instructors may teach in  ways that reflect their own learning styles, and they  may assume that their students also learn in that  way. Evidence indicates that student learning (or at  least retention) is enhanced as more learning stages  are used (Stice 1987). This confirms Kolb’s argu-  ment that teachers should encourage students to  engage in all four stages of the learning cycle.  Indeed, Kolb (1984,203) suggests that there are  potential long-term benefits when there is an inten-  tional mismatch between learning style and instruc-  tional style on the grounds that,  The aim is to make the student self-renew-  ing and self-directed; to focus on integra-  tive development where the person is high-  ly developed in each of the four learning  modes: active, reflective, abstract and con-  crete. Here, the student is taught to experi-  ence the tension and conflict among these  orientations, for it is from these tensions  that creativity springs.  Kolb (1976) produced a learning style inventory  (LSI 1976) that identifes students’ preferred learning  styles. An updated version (LSI 1985) was produced  nearly a decade later (Kolb 1985). Kolb’s LSI 1985  has been found to be highly reliable, although vari-  ation has been found between disciplines (Willcox-  son and Prosser 1996). The LSI 1985 requires the  ranking of each of 12 sets of four short sentences  about learning (from 1, least like you, to 4, most like  you), which can be completed and self-scored in  about 10 min~tes.~ The subject obtains scores for  Table 1. The relationship between learning style and learning  conditions (after Kolb 1984). each of the four learning stages: CE, RO, AC, and  AE
and learning  conditions (after Kolb 1984). each of the four learning stages: CE, RO, AC, and  AE (ranging from 12 to 48). The AE-RO (active-  reflective) score gives a value for plotting on the  horizontal axis, while the AC-CE (abstract-concrete)  score gives a value for the vertical axis.6  Results using Kolb’s (1976) LSI 1976 have  shown some measure of agreement about clusters  of disciplines based on the learning styles predomi-  nant among their students (Kolb 1981). More agree-  ment is apparent if disciplines are subsumed under  descriptions, such as social sciences or humanities  (Willcoxson and Prosser 1996). It should be noted,  however, that reporting a numerical majority as the  predominant learning style obscures the range of  styles found. Moreover, the groupings are not  absolutely precise because different modes of dis-  course and forms of teaching may be adopted  which are non-traditional to that discipline (Nulty  and Barrett 1996). There is also evidence that learn-  ing styles are related to the stage students are in  their studies. Nulty and Barrett (1986) found that  students in the first third of their studies adopted  learning styles that were similar to each other irre-  spective of main disciplines. However, the learning  styles of students in the final third of their studies  tended to be related to the discipline that was the  primary focus of their studies.  ies. Kolb (1984) found that American students  studying geography favored an assimilative learn-  ing style, while Nulty and Barrett (1996) found that,  in an Australian study, geography students were  predominantly accommodators (Figure 3). Bradbeer  (1999), in commenting on these differences, sug-  gests that in all probability the British picture for  geography would be closer to the Australian than  to the American. However, what is not known is if  the students analyzed were specializing in human  or physical geography. It might be expected that  physical geographers would
specializing in human  or physical geography. It might be expected that  physical geographers would have similar learning  styles to natural scientists (predominantly assimila-  tors, see Figure 3), while human geographers  would have greater similarities with social scientists  (predominantly accommodators, see Figure 3). At  first this seems at variance with the findings in the The position of geography varies between stud-  Learning Style Optimum Learning Conditions  Diverger  Assimilator  Converger  Accommodator United States, where geography is predominantly  human geography. However, in the late 1970s and  early 1980s, applying a scientific method was the  predominant mode of explanation in human geog-  raphy. Today, with the plurality of approaches in  geography, geography students’ need for a flexible  approach to learning has probably never been  stronger. When allowed to observe and gather a  wide range of information  When presented with sound logical  theories to consider  When provided with practical applica-  tions of concepts and theories  When allowed to gain hands-on experi-  ence
190 Healey and Jenkins  APPLYING THE THEORY TO GEOGRAPHY  TEACHING  When we first hear the central ideas of Kolb’s  theory they may well have an intuitive appeal, for  they connect to-even legitimatize-much of what  we do as teachers. As researchers, we may note that  the theory parallels, in part, the (scientific) research  method of observation, hypothesis building, theory,  and testing. Thus, experience parallels observation,  reflection parallels hypothesis building, and so on.  For geographers, it gives a theoretical rationale for  the importance of fieldwork, which many of us  agree should be central to the geography curricu-  lum (Sauer 1956). It can also be readily applied to  our teaching, whether we are teaching the practical  aspects of GIS or the theoretical ideas of feminism.  But like all powerful theories, it takes us beyond  what we already know and transforms how we  conceive and act in our role as geography teachers.  It is important to emphasize that though the theory  stresses the importance of learning from experience,  through activities such as fieldwork or using a com-  puter-based learning package, it is just as relevant  to the planning of a lecture or seminar.  The central practical applications of the theory  include how a session, or a course, can be devel-  oped in a way that takes students systematically  through the whole cycle, as well as a consideration  of the teaching methods that are particularly valu-  able at certain stages of the cycle.  Gibbs (1988) usefully links Kolb’s cycle to edu-  cational practice by relating teaching methods to  four common experiential methods placed within  the sequence of Kolb’s model: planning for experi-  ence, increasing awareness, reviewing and reflect-  ing on experience, and providing substitute experi-  ences (Figure 4). For example, under planning for  experience (a stage spanning conceptualization and  experimentation), Kolb includes action plans and  learning contracts. Under reviewing and
and  experimentation), Kolb includes action plans and  learning contracts. Under reviewing and reflecting  on experience (which spans experience and reflec-  tion), he suggests structured discussions, peer  appraisal, and self-assessment. Svinicki and Dixon  (1994) provide a similar list of instructional activi-  ties that may support different aspects of the learn-  ing cycle.  In setting out the pedagogic implications of  Kolb’s theory, Gibbs (1988,9) argues, ”It is not  enough just to do, and neither is it enough just to  think. Nor is it enough simply to do and think.  Learning from experience must involve linking the  doinn and the thinking-.” We demonstrate this bv showing how, as geographers, we could systemati-  cally take students through the cycle. Based on real  courses, the following descriptions demonstrate  more clearly the practical applications of the theory.  Teaching How Theories of Gender Explain  Aspects of Suburbia  In an Opening Lecture  Stage 1 (CE). Students individually read brief  excerpts from three or four novels that  describe aspects of living in suburbia. This  gives them a ”substitute” concrete experience.  Stage 2 (RO). In groups of 3 or 4, students consider  key questions, such as does it appear that  these experiences were differently shaped by  gender? Here, students are being required to  reflect back on their reading and are being  primed for the next theoretical stage.  Stage 3 (AC). A fifteen-minute lecture sets out key  ideas in how contrasting gender theorists  have analyzed the suburban landscape and  identified different understandings of the  concept of landscape. This is the abstract con-  ceptualization phase.  Stage 4 (AE). Students are directed to the section of  the course guide concerned with assessment  and to the course reader. The reader includes  articles that exemplify contrasting theoretical  positions on gender and landscape that were  outlined in the 15-minute lecture. Each stu-  dent group of 3 or 4 is
and landscape that were  outlined in the 15-minute lecture. Each stu-  dent group of 3 or 4 is allocated one of these  theoretical positions and directed to present  at the next class session a poster that illus-  trates how that theory would explain aspects  of suburbia. In this stage students are actively  experimenting with a theoretical position(s).  In the Next Class Session  Stage 5 (CE). Students display their posters and  view posters from other groups (experience).  Stage 6 (RO). In small groups, students discuss  questions that push them to reflect on the  posters and theoretical positions presented.  At this stage, questions may be directing  them to look for links between, and inconsis-  tencies in, the theories. Though the teacher  leads this stage, the students are doing most  of the talking and the thinking (reflection).  session draws out the different theoretical Stage 7 (AC). In this key stage a teacher-led plenary  ” ”
Kolb ’s Experiential Learning Theory 191  positions and what they reveal about subur-  bia (conceptualization).  Stage 8 (AE). Students individually (or in groups)  write an analysis of a novel (or film) from one  of the theoretical positions analyzed thus far  (experimentation).  At this point the course moves on to another  topic where Kolb’s theory may be again used to  Planning for experience  Experience  Conceptualization  Action plans  Setting objectives  Designing experiments  Observation checklists  Devising criteria  Learning contracts  Action research  Reviewing and reflecting upon experience  Experience  Experimentation Reflection  Conceptualization  Diaries  Using video and audio recordings  Peer appraisal  Structured discussions  Structured de-briefing Self assessment  Reflection checklists and questionnaires  ‘Shared time’ and ‘mutual interviewing’  Modelling reflection structure the learning experience. The hope, of  course, is that students will reflect back on the  course and use the method of analysis (AE) the next  time they drive through suburbia (CE). Students  might discuss that experience with other people  (RO) and perhaps suggest that if others read this  theory (AC), they would see the landscape differ-  ently and their experience would be transformed by  that learning.  Increasing awareness of experience  Experience  Experimentation Reflection  Conceptualization  Log books  Listening exercises  Questions  Increasing awareness of feelings  Silent demonstrations  Providing substitute experiences  Experience  Conceptualization  Case studies Games Simulations  Role plays  Assessing through substitute experiences  Figure 4. Practical methods to implement the experiential learning cycle (based on Gibbs 1988, 23-63).
192 Healey and Jenkins  Teaching a Field Course  Before the Field Course  Stage 1 (AC). Students are required to read about  competing theories on the geography of post-  industrial societies.  ject groups plan questions with defined inter-  est groups and set up interviews for the open-  ing days of the field course. Stage 2 (AE). To test these models, students in pro-  During the Field Course  Stage 3 (CE). Initial field interviews.  Stage 4 (RO). Structured discussion, or journal writ-  Stage 5 (AC). Tentative statement about validity of ing, that encourages the student to reflect.  models as applied to this location/interest  group.  Stage 6 (AE). Planning questions to further test  revised model in subsequent interviews.  Stage 7 (CE). Further interviews.  The cycle can be maintained, but at some point  (probably at AC or AE) there is closure.  Making Students More Aware of Themselves  as Learners  In the initial session of a first-year introductory  geography course, the faculty uses the following  activities to help students reflect on themselves as  learners and to explain the variety of teaching  methods and the teaching philosophy they will  encounter as geography majors.  They are first asked to think of one context  where, in their view, they individually have effec-  tively learnt something outside the classroom. They  are then asked to explain to another student how  they went about that learning. On the basis of the  discussion within these pairs, the instructor builds  up the variety of ways students have learned. At  this stage the instructor is developing an implicit  classroom culture that values different ways of  learning, but introducing no explicit theory or con-  clusion as to how people learn. Students then indi-  vidually complete one of the learning style invento-  ries (e.g., Kolb 1985, Honey and Mumford 1992).  Students are formally introduced to experiential  learning theory and the implications for them as  learners, both individually
to experiential  learning theory and the implications for them as  learners, both individually and collectively. It is  emphasized that although they may have a pre- ferred learning style, it is important that they are  able to use a range of learning styles to improve  their overall learning in a variety of situations.  Finally, the teaching team describes how this intro-  ductory module, and the geography program as a  whole, is structured to recognize individual student  learning styles. This exercise was particularly effec-  tive because the teaching team had previously  undertaken the staff development exercise  described below.  Encouraging Staff Members to Rethink Their  Teaching Style  As part of a department retreat, staff members  experienced a set of exercises similar to those their  students encountered the following year (see  above). After the staff understood and discussed  the basic features of the theory, each teacher applied  it to the way that one of the courses for which he or  she was individually responsible was taught. Staff  members were then challenged to redesign that  course, making more explicit use of Kolb’s theory.  This exercise was followed by discussions on  the validity of the theory and on staff members’  practical concerns about applying it. These discus-  sions were well informed and effective because the  staff had experience in applying the theory, as well  as in reflecting on that experience. Thus, a very con-  structive discussion ensued around identifying  types of teaching associated with developing partic-  ular learning styles (Figure 4) and how a linked set  of GIS computer labs could be restructured to take  students systematically through the cycle.  to consider a particular geography course. Two  groups considered the first-semester introductory  course, one of which designed the activities  described above. Other groups considered the final-  year capstone course, as well as other courses that  were taken by most
considered the final-  year capstone course, as well as other courses that  were taken by most geography majors. Just as they  had done with their individual course, the project  groups applied the theory to these more collective  courses, first analyzing the courses as currently  taught, and then redesigning them making explicit  use of the theory.  Though there were some reservations and dis-  agreements, the department decided to require  selected key courses to be redesigned to explicitly  use Kolb’s theory. A budget and time frame for  implementation over three years was agreed upon,  starting the following academic year with the intro-  ductory course and the activity described above. Staff members were divided into project groups
Kolb’s Experiential Learning Theoy 193  As previously stated, the case studies, although  based on real examples, have been written to make  more explicit the use of Kolb’s theory and to ensure  that they are immediately relevant to geographers.  Other published examples of geographers using the  theory were referred to in the introduction, and  give further pointers to the theory’s potential for  improving student learning in the discipline.  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION  Teachers developing courses using experiential  methods, including the learning cycle, need to be  reassured that this does not mean rejecting what  they usually do or adopting wholesale Kolb’s theo-  ry and its associated practical applications. The  approach can be readily developed from what we  already do. For example, a simple introduction of  reflective elements into a lecture can be a way for  students and teachers alike to gain confidence in  using the the~ry.~  In presenting Kolb’s theory we argue that it  presents teachers of all disciplines with key insights  and practical applications from cognitive and  behavioral psychology. Entwistle (1991), one of  Britain’s major theorists on higher education,  argues that this well-developed literature demon-  strates that teachers should  take full account of the range of learning  styles that any class or group of students  will exhibit;  recognize that the teachers’ own learning  styles are likely to shape their teaching  and the approaches they adopt to course  design; and  avoid the dangers of allowing one partic-  ular approach to teaching to exclude the  others. perspective of Bigg (1999, xii), with its theoretical  arguments that course design or teaching is  ”enhanced by aligning objectives, teaching meth-  ods, and assessment tasks.”  Since Kolb’s theory was first proposed in the  mid-l970s, several writers have suggested alter-  ations.8 Nevertheless, we commend the experiential learning theory for being a well-developed theory  that has
we commend the experiential learning theory for being a well-developed theory  that has now received careful analysis and some  testing in the educational research community. We  are particularly drawn to it for the reasons that we  have discussed in this article. It is a theory whose  central features are relatively easy to grasp and that  can be readily applied to an individual session by  one teacher or to a degree program taught by  many.9  our concerns with students learning directly from  the environment, particularly in fieldwork. Its par-  ticular appeal to us is that it legitimates the wide  variety of teaching methods that have now been  developed by geographers, and also gives us theo-  retical and practical pointers to improvement. Cru-  cially, Kolb’s ideas still allow  us, as teachers, to  emphasize the particular stages of the cycle which  fit with our own learning and teaching styles, as  long as we take our students through the entire  cycle. However, the characteristic learning styles of  geography students remain unclear. It is important  that we establish whether geography students in  higher education in the early twenty-first century  have a predominant learning style and whether this  varies between countries and the stage students are  in their studies. For geographers it has a ready connection to  Authors‘ Note: Many colleagues helped in the preparation of this arti-  cle by pointing out useful references. We are particularly grateful to  John Bradbeer and David Robotkam for their comments on an earlier  draft of the article and for David‘s permission to quotefrom an unpub-  lished paper.  However, in presenting the value of the experi-  ential learning theory to geographers, we need to  be careful not to privilege it above other theorists  who seek to explain student learning. For example,  we commend the work of Prosser and Trigwell  (1999), who bring together the extensive literature  on deep and surface learning (i.e., how students
who bring together the extensive literature  on deep and surface learning (i.e., how students  approach their studies) to argue for a pedagogy  that starts from teachers investigating individual  student’s prior conceptions of what they are study-  ing. Bradbeer (1999) uses this work to suggest how  geographers can approach the design of interdisci-  plinary courses. Given most state systems’ focus on  assessment, we also commend the constructivist NOTES  1 David Kolb’s experiential learning theory is one of the  best-known educational theories in higher education (Kolb  and Fry 1975, Kolb 1984) and is frequently cited in the lit-  erature on geography in higher education in the UK. How-  ever, judging from the published literature and the  responses we received to an inquiry we placed on the  International Geographical Union Commission on Geo-  graphic Education (IGU-CGE) listserve, the theory appears  to be less well-known among geographers in North Ameri-  ca and elsewhere. This is surprising given that Kolb is an  American organizational psychologist whose work has  attracted considerable attention in North America, particu-  larly in the education, management, and psychology litera-  ture (see, for example, the 12-page bibliography at the end  of Smith and Kolb 119861). We hope that the next time  someone surveys the application of Kolb in geography,
194 Healey and Jenkins  4  5  6  9 there will be a wide range of US and other non-UK exam-  ples of its use.  Readers interested in the application of Kolb’s ideas at the  curriculum level may find the story of the change and  invention at Weatherhead School of Management intrigu-  ing (Boyatzis et al. 1995).  Kolbs model can be used as a description of learning  processes in general (Henry 1989), but his emphasis on  reflection places it firmly in the experience-based learning  camp. The importance of reflection is emphasized by Bore-  ham (1987,89), who notes that ”the term ’learning from  experience’ really means learning from reflection on expe-  rience.” Boud et al. (1985) make a similar point in coining  a slogan for the title of their book Reflection: Turning Experi-  ence into Learning. Without reflection on experience, stu-  dents are in danger of continuing to make the same mis-  takes.  In brief, Kolb conceptualizes the process of action research  as “a spiral of action and research consisting of four major  moments: plan, act, observe and reflect ” (Zuber-Skerritt  1992b, 11). Race (1993) has proposed a variant on Kolb’s  model by using more everyday language. He refers to the  stages as wanting, doing, feedback, and digesting; and  Race’s model has been used by one of the authors (Healey  1998) to explore the nature of the learning process with  several groups of geography students and staff.  We found difficulty in obtaining a library copy of Kolb’s  1985 Learning Style Inventory in the UK; and we are grate-  ful to Kathryn Booth, who lent us hers. Fortunately, read-  ers wishing to use the LSI may find a copy of the 48 items  used for identifying predominant learning style in Loo  (1999,219). The full LSI may be obtained directly from the  publisher (McBer, Boston, Massachusetts). Details may be  found at <http:/ /trgmcber.haygroup.com/learning/  lsius.htm>.  The resulting single point identifies the subject as diverger,  assimilator, converger, or
The resulting single point identifies the subject as diverger,  assimilator, converger, or accommodator (Figure 2). Other  researchers have also produced their own learning style  inventories. For example, Honey and Mumford (1986)  adapted Kolb’s inventory and used simpler language:  pragmatist, reflector, theorist, and activist. They also give  advice on how to make the best use of one’s learning style,  how to improve each style, and how to choose learning  activities to suit one’s style.  Both Gibbs (1988) and Svinicki and Dixon (1994) provide  excellent advice for teachers who decide to adopt this  approach.  Cowan (1998) provides many intriguing examples of his  overstretched spring model, which incorporates ideas from  both Kolb (1984) and Schon (1983). Mann (1999), on the  other hand, has modified the theory to make it more  developmental. Bradford (2000) provides an application of  Mann’s model in geography. Kolb’s theory has also attract-  ed many critiques, both from a theoretical viewpoint (e.g.,  Holman et al. 1997) and an applied perspective (e.g.,  November 1997). There is much debate in the literature  about the effectiveness of matching teaching methods to  learning styles. Robotham (1999) found that “for each  research study supporting the principle of matching  instructional style and learning style there is a study reject-  ing the matching hypothesis.” Fielding (1994,403), more-  over, emphasizes that ”Learning styles are flexible struc-  tures, not immutable personality traits.” This raises the  question of the extent to which learning styles are stable or  changeable. However, the evidence is unclear, as Roboth-  am (1999) concludes, “Research into the relative stability of  learning style ... remains both confusing and confused.”  Despite some questions which have been raised about the  reliability of Kolb’s learning style inventory, it is clear that  using it with students helps them to improve their learn-  ing effectiveness in different
that  using it with students helps them to improve their learn-  ing effectiveness in different learning situations (Loo 1997). REFERENCES  Anderson, J. A,, and M. Adams. 1992. Acknowledging the learn-  ing styles of diverse student populations: Implications for  instructional design. In Teaching for Diversity, eds., N. Chism  and L. Border, pp. 19-33. San Francisco, California: Jossey-  Bass.  Biggs, J. 1999. Teachingfor Quality Learning at University. Milton  Keynes, UK Society for Research into Higher Education and  Open University Press.  Birnie, J., and K. Mason O’Connor. 1998. Practicals and Laboratory  Work in Geography. Cheltenham, UK: Geography Discipline  Network, Cheltenham and Gloucester College of Higher  Education.  Boreham, N. C. 1987. Learning from experience in diagnostic  problem solving. In Student Learning: Research in Education  and Cognitive Psychology, eds., J. T. E. Richardson, M. W.  Eysenck, and D. W. Piper, pp. 89-97. Milton Keynes, UK  Society for Research into Higher Education and Open Uni-  versity Press.  Boud, D., R. Keogh, and D. Walker, eds. 1985. Reflection: Turning  Experience into Learning. London, UK Kogan Page.  Boyatzis, R. E., S. S. Cowen, D. A. Kolb, and Associates. 1995.  Innovation in Professional Education: Steps on a Journey from  Teaching to Learning. San Francisco, California: Jossey-Bass.  Bradbeer, J. 1999. Barriers to interdisciplinarity: Disciplinary dis-  courses and student learning. Journal of Geography in Higher  Education 23:381-396.  Bradford, M. 2000. Improving Students’ Team and Personal Skills.  Cheltenham, UK Geography Discipline Network, Chel-  tenham and Gloucester College of Higher Education.  Brown, G. H. 1999. A group-learning approach to academic and  transferable skills through an exercise in the global position-  ing system. Journal of Geography in Higher Education  Burkill S., D. Corey, and M. Healey 2000. Improving Students’ 23:291-301.  Communication Skills in Geography. Cheltenham, UK Geogra-
2000. Improving Students’ 23:291-301.  Communication Skills in Geography. Cheltenham, UK Geogra-  phy Discipline Network, Cheltenham and Gloucester College  of Higher Education.  based Learning in Geography. Cheltenham, UK: Geography  Discipline Network, Cheltenham and Gloucester College of  Higher Education.  Cowan, J. 1998. On Becoming an Innovative University Teacher:  Reflection in Action. Milton Keynes, UK: Open University.  Entwistle, N. J. 1991. Cognitive style and learning. In The Founda-  tions of Student Learning, ed., K. Marjoribanks. Oxford, UK:  Pergamon.  Building on Kolb’s learning styles to develop a language of  teaching and learning. The Curriculum Journal 5:393417.  Gardner, H. 1999. The Disciplined Mind: What All Students Should  Understand. New York Simon and Schuster.  Geography for the New Undergraduate. 1999. Tutor Guide. Liver-  pool, UK. Liverpool Hope University College.  Gibbs, G. 1988. Learning by Doing: A Guide to Teaching and Learn-  ing Methods. London, UK: Further Education Unit.  Gibbs, G., ed. 1992. Teaching More Students Projects. Oxford, UK  Polytechnics and Colleges Funding Council and Oxford  Polytechnic.  Gold, J. R., A. Jenkins, R. Lee, J. Monk, J. Riley, I. D. H. Shepherd,  and D. J. Unwin. 1991. Teaching Geography in Higher Educa-  tion: A Manual of Good Practice. Oxford, U.K.: Basil Blackwell. Chalkley, B., and J. Harwood. 1998. Transferable Skills and Work-  Fielding, M. 1994. Valuing difference in teachers and learners:
Kolb’s Experiential Leavning Theory 195  Gravestock, P., and M. Healey, eds. 1998. Guides to Good Teaching,  Learning and Assessment Practices in Geography. Cheltenham,  UK Geography Discipline Network, Cheltenham and  Gloucester College of Higher Education.  development of personal transferable skills. Journal of Geogra-  phy in Higher Education 23:195-206.  tenham, UK: Geography Discipline Network, Cheltenham  and Gloucester College of Higher Education.  Henry, J. 1989. Meaning and practice in experiential learning. In  Making Sense of Experiential Learning: Diversity in Theory and  Practice, eds., S. W. Weil and I. McGill, pp. 25-37. Milton  Keynes, UK Society for Research into Higher Education and  Open University Press.  Hertzog, C. J., and C. Lieble 1996. A study of two techniques for  teaching introductory geography: Traditional approach ver-  sus cooperative learning in the university classroom. Journal  of Geography 95:274-280.  theory of experiential learning in management education:  The construction of social constructionism and activity theo-  ry Management Learning 28:135-148.  Honey, P., and A. Mumford. 1986. Using Your Learning Styles.  Maidenhead, UK: Peter Honey.  Honey, P., and A. Mumford. 1992. The Manual of Learning Styles.  Maidenhead, UK Peter Honey.  Jenkins, A. 1997. Fieldwork with More Students. Oxford, UK  Oxford Centre for Staff and Learning Development.  Jenkins, A. 1998. Curriculum Design in Geography. Cheltenham,  UK: Geography Discipline Network, Cheltenham and  Gloucester College of Higher Education.  Kolb, D. A. 1976. Learning Style Inventory. Boston, Massachusetts:  McBer.  Kolb, D. A. 1981. Learning styles and disciplinary differences. In  The Modern American College, eds., A. W. Chickering and  Associates, pp. 232-255. San Francisco, California: Jossey-  Bass.  Kolb, D. A. 1984. Experiential Learning: Experience as the Source of  Learning and Development. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey:  Prentice-Hall.  Kolb, D. A. 1985. Learning
Learning and Development. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey:  Prentice-Hall.  Kolb, D. A. 1985. Learning Style Inventory. Revised edition.  Boston, Massachusetts: McBer.  Kolb, D., and R. Fry. 1975. Towards an applied theory of experi-  ential learning. In Theories of Group Processes, ed., C. L. Cop-  per, pp. 33-58. London, UK John Wiley.  Loo, R. 1997. Using Kolb’s Learning Style Inventory (LSI 1985) in  the classroom. Proceedings of the Association of Management Haigh, M., and M. P. Kilmartin 1999. Student perceptions of the  Healey, M. 1998. Resource-based Learning in Geography. Chel-  Holman, D., K. Pavlica, and R. Thorpe. 1997. Rethinking Kolb’s  15:47-51. Loo, R. 1999. Confirmatory factor analysis of Kolb’s Learning  Style Inventory (LSI-1985). British Journal ofEducationa1 Psy-  chology 691213-219.  Mann, P. 1999. Can we make development training developmen-  Mellor, A. 1991. Experiential learning through integrated project tal? Public Administration and Development 19:105-116.  work: An example from soil science. Journal of Geography in  Higher Education 15:135-149.  November, P. 1997. Learning to teach experientially: A pilgrim’s  progress. Studies in Higher Education 22:289-299.  Nulty, D. D., and M. A. Barrett. 1996. Transitions in students’  learning styles. Studies in Higher Education 21:333-345.  Prosser, M., and K. Trigwell. 1999. Understanding Learning and  Teaching: The Experience of Higher Education. Buckingham, UK:  Society for Higher Education and Open University Press.  Race, P. 1993. Never Mind the Teaching Feel the Learning. SEDA  Paper 80. Birmingham, UK Staff and Educational Develop-  ment Association.  Robotham, D. 1995. Self-directed learning: The ultimate learning  style? Journal of European Industrial Training 19(7):3-7.  Robotham, D. 1999. The application of learning style theory in  higher education teaching. Unpublished article. Available  from <http:/ /www.chelt.ac.uk/gdn/discuss/index.htm>.  Sauer, C. 0.1956. The education of a
from <http:/ /www.chelt.ac.uk/gdn/discuss/index.htm>.  Sauer, C. 0.1956. The education of a geographer. Annals of Asso-  ciation of American Geographers 46:287-289.  Schon, D. 1983. The Reflective Practitioner. New York Basic Books.  Shepherd, I. 1998. Teaching and Learning Geography with lnforma-  tion and Communication Technologies. Cheltenham, UK Geog-  raphy Discipline Network, Cheltenham and Gloucester Col-  lege of Higher Education.  Style Inventory: A Manual for Teachers and Trainers. Boston,  Massachusetts: McBer.  Stice, J. E. 1987. Using Kolb’s learning cycle to improve student  learning. Engineering Education 77:291-296.  Svinicki, M. D., and N. M. Dixon. 1994. The Kolb model modi-  fied for classroom activities. In Teaching and Learning in the  College Classroom, eds., K. A. Feldman and M. B. Paulsen, pp.  307-315. Needham Heights, Massachusetts: Ginn Press.  Inventory (1985): Review and further study of validity and  reliability. British Journal of Educational Psychology 66:251-261.  Zuber-Skerritt, 0. 1992a. Professional Development in Higher Educa-  tion: A Theoretical Framework for Action Research. London, UK  Kogan Page.  Zuber-Skerritt, 0. 1992b. Action Research in Higher Education:  Examples and Reflections. London, UK: Kogan Page. Smith, D. M., and D. Kolb. 1986. Users’ Guide for the Learning  Willcoxson, L., and M. Prosser. 1996. Kolb’s Learning Style
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjog20 Journal of Geography ISSN: 0022-1341 (Print) 1752-6868 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rjog20 Kolb's Experiential Learning Theory and Its Application in Geography in Higher Education Mick Healey & Alan Jenkins To cite this article:  Mick Healey & Alan Jenkins (2000) Kolb's Experiential Learning Theory and Its Application in Geography in Higher Education, Journal of Geography, 99:5, 185-195, DOI: 10.1080/00221340008978967 To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00221340008978967 Published online: 16 Aug 2007. Submit your article to this journal  Article views: 94948 View related articles  Citing articles: 67 View citing articles
Kolb’s Experiential Learning Theory and Its  Application in Geography in Higher Education  Mick Healey and Alan Jenkins  learning is a process as well as an outcome  (Zuber-Skerritt 1992a, 103)  an understanding of learning styles is a necessary component in the  groundwork of an emancipatory pedagogy  (Fielding 1994,394)  Since the publication of his seminal book, Experiential Learning:  Experience as the Source of Learning and Development (Kolb 1984), Ameri-  can organizational psychologist David Kolb’s ideas have influenced the  work of teachers and trainers, particularly those involved with students  16 years old and upwards (Fielding 1994, Robotham 1995).  Kolb’s research provides a firm theoretical base, which is lacking in  the work of many other writers (Holman et al. 1997). According to Kolb  (1984,38), ”Learning is the process whereby knowledge is created  through the transformation of experience.” The theory presents a way  of structuring and sequencing the curriculum and indicates, in particu-  lar, how a session or entire course may be taught to improve student  learning. It suggests that learning is cyclical, involving four stages,  which, paraphrasing Kolb, may be referred to as experience, reflect,  generalize, and test (Cowan 1998). An important feature of the theory is  that the different stages are associated with distinct learning styles. Indi-  viduals differ in their preferred learning styles, and recognizing this is  the first stage in raising students’ awareness of alternative approaches  and helping them to be more flexible in meeting the varied demands of  learning situations (Gibbs 1988). Teachers also need to recognize their  own individual learning styles as a basis for the development of effec-  tive teaching and learning strategies. Learning may suffer where a  marked mismatch occurs between the style of the learner and the  approach of the teacher (Fielding 1994).  increasing emphasis on access, diversity, retention rates, and
of the teacher (Fielding 1994).  increasing emphasis on access, diversity, retention rates, and life-long  learning, there is good reason to explore the nature of different learning  styles. Indeed, given the increased recognition within geography of rec-  ognizing and valuing gender and cultural diversity, the theory is partic-  ularly relevant as ”it is rooted in a theory of learning that affirms all  major aspects of active learning, usefully accounting for an array of  individual and ... culturally derived ... differences” (Anderson and Adams  1992,25). With the expansion of higher education in many countries and the ABSTRACT  Kolb’s experiential learning theory  is one of the best known educational  theories in higher education. The theo-  ry presents a way of structuring a ses-  sion or a whole course using a learning  cycle. The different stages of the cycle  are associated with distinct learning  styles. Individuals differ in their pre-  ferred learning styles, and recognizing  this is the first stage in raising students’  awareness of the alternative approaches  possible. This article presents some case  studies of ways in which the theory can  be applied in university geography.  Key Words: learning cycles, learning  styles, Kolb’s experiential leavning theory,  learning and teaching, geography in higher  education  Mick Healey is Professor in the Geography  and Environmental Management Research  Unit, Cheltenham and Gloucester College  of Higher Education, Cheltenham GL50  4AZ, UK.  Alan Jenkins is Professor at the Oxford  Centre for Staff and Learning Develop-  ment, Oxford Rrookes University, Head-  ington, Oxford, OX3 ORP, UK.  Journal of Geography 99:185-195  02000 National Council for Geographic Education
186 Healey and Jenkins  The theory appears to offer a valid and plausi-  ble framework to many people, and it is often the  main or only theory referred to in many works on  experiential learning (Henry 1989) and geography  in higher education (at least in the UK).’ Some of  the theory’s appeal is that it provides a rationale for  a variety of learning methods, including indepen-  dent learning, learning by doing, work-based learn-  ing, and problem-based learning, which have  recently received much attention within higher edu-  cation (e.g., Gibbs 1992, Henry 1989) and geogra-  phy (e.g., Gold et al. 1991, Gravestock and Healey  1998). Moreover, the theory has a wide range of  applications in geography, including helping stu-  dents to become self-aware (e.g., Bradbeer 1999,  Geography for the New Undergraduate 1999);  assisting staff to become reflective teachers (e.g.,  Burkill et al. 2000) and students reflective learners  (Birnie and Mason O’Connor 1998); identifying stu-  dents’ learning styles (e.g., Hertzog and Lieble  1996); developing and teaching key skills (e.g.,  Chalkley and Harwood 1998, Haigh and Kilmartin  1999); designing group projects (e.g., Brown 1999,  Mellor 1991); deciding how resource-based learning  and information and communications technology  can support the learning process (e.g., Healey 1998,  Shepherd 1998); and developing the overall geogra-  phy curriculum (e.g., Jenkins 1998).2  In summary, we believe that the particular  strengths of Kolb’s theory are that it  provides ready pointers to application;  directs us to ensure that a range of teach-  ing methods is used in a course;  provides a theoretical rationale for what  many of us already do as teachers and  then offers suggestions on how to  improve on that practice (in particular  ensuring effective links between theory  and application);  makes explicit the importance of encour-  aging students to reflect and providing  them with feedback to reinforce their  learning;  supports
aging students to reflect and providing  them with feedback to reinforce their  learning;  supports us in developing a diverse,  aware classroom;  makes us aware of the way in which dif-  ferent learning styles have to be com-  bined for effective learning;  can be readily applied to all areas of the  discipline, from a GIS laboratory exercise  to a feminist analysis of a landscape;  can be used by individuals and course  teams; and can be applied widely from a single  classroom session to an entire degree  program.  In this article we have two main aims. First, we  outline the main features of Kolb’s experiential  learning theory. Second, we describe and assess  some ways in which the theory has been, or could  be, applied in geography in higher education.  The ideas we discuss are equally applicable for  learning about geography at K-12 level. Indeed, we  note how aspects of Kolb’s theory, and the peda-  gogic practices that he and others have derived  from that theory, parallel the work of Gardner  (1999), a Harvard psychologist whose theory of  multiple intelligences has had major impacts on  many K-12 teachers in the US. Both Gardner’s and  Kolb’s theories emphasize the different learning  styles of individual students and the necessity for  teachers to use a wide range of teaching methods to  meet their needs.  KOLB’S EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING THEORY  Kolb (1984), building on earlier work by Dewey  and Lewin, provides ”a comprehensive theory  which offers the foundation for an approach to edu-  cation and learning as a lifelong process and which  is soundly based in intellectual traditions of philos-  ophy and cognitive and social psychology” (Zuber-  Skerritt 1992a, 98)?  The core of Kolb’s four-stage model is a simple  description of a learning cycle that shows how  experience is translated through reflection into con-  cepts, which in turn are used as guides for active  experimentation and the choice of new experiences.  Kolb refers to these four stages as
for active  experimentation and the choice of new experiences.  Kolb refers to these four stages as concrete experi-  ence (CE), reflective observation (RO), abstract con-  ceptualization (AC), and active experimentation  (AE). They follow each other in a cycle (Figure 1).  The cycle may be entered at any point, but the  stages should be followed in sequence. The learning  cycle therefore provides feedback, which is the  basis for new action and evaluation of the conse-  quences of that action. Learners should go through  the cycle several times, so it may best be thought of  as a spiral of  cycle^.^  As its name indicates, the experiential learning  theory affirms the importance of experiential activi-  ties, such as fieldwork and laboratory sessions;  however, it does not prioritize those forms of learn-  ing. What is important is to systematically take the  learner through each stage of the cycle, ensuring  that effective links are made between each stage. --- Kolb‘s Experiential Learning Theory 187  Active Experimentation (AE)  PLAN Reflective Observation (RO) 0 BS E RV E  Abstract Conceptualization (AC)  THINK  Concrete Experience:  Reflective Observation:  Abstract Conceptualization:  Active Experimentation: Where the learner is actively experiencing an activity  (e.g., a laboratory session, field class)  Where the learner is consciously reflecting back on that experience  Where the learner is being presented with/or trying to conceptualise a  theory or model of what is (to be) observed  Where the learner is trying to plan how to test a model or theory or plan  for a forthcoming experience  Figure 1. Kolb’s experiential learning cycle (based on Jenkins 11998,431).  The model offers an explicit critique of highly theo-  retical programs or courses that do not value the  prior experience or knowledge of students. It is  similarly critical of activities (e.g., certain field  courses, simulations, and games) where students  receive little preparation for the experience or no  effective chance to reflect upon the experience and  relate it to their wider reading or to the more theo-  retical aspects of the course (Jenkins 1997).  Two primary axes lie behind the cycle: an  abstract conceptualization-concrete experience  (AC-CE) dimension and an active experimenta-  tion-reflective observation (AE-RO) dimension.  These reflect the two main dimensions of the learn-  ing process that correspond to two major ways by  which we learn. The first is how we perceive or  grasp new information or experience, and the sec-  ond is how we process or transform what we per-  ceive (Smith and Kolb 1986). The way we perceive  experience ranges from immersing ourselves in the  experience-using our senses and feelings in a  ”concrete” way-to thinking ’’abstractly’’-using  logic and reason. Having perceived the experience,  we need to understand it through transforming it.  Here, individuals differ in their predilection for  doing (active
it through transforming it.  Here, individuals differ in their predilection for  doing (active experimentation) and watching  (reflective observation) (Fielding 1994). When plot- ted at right angles the two axes give four different  clusters, which may be used both to describe the  preferred learning styles of students (Figure 2) and  to identify disciplinary groupings (Figure 3).  Kolb (1984) suggests that students develop a  preference for learning in a particular way. Students  may adopt different learning styles in different situ-  ations, but they tend to favor some learning behav-  iors over others. He identifies four learning styles,  each of which is associated with a different way of  solving problems (Figure 2).  Divergers view situations from many  perspectives and rely heavily upon brain-  storming and generation of ideas.  and have the ability to create theoretical  models.  Convergers rely heavily on hypothetical-  deductive reasoning.  Accommodators carry out plans and  experiments and adapt to immediate cir-  cumstances. Assimilators use inductive reasoning  The particular choice of learning style reflects the  individual’s abilities, environment, and learning  history (Nulty and Barrett 1996). According to Kolb,
188 Healey and Jenkins  Percentile:  Concrete 0  (-27)  I  AC CE 5o AE  (Median=3.8)  Abstract I  (+29) 100 CE  Accommodator  Can carry out plans  Interested in action and results  Adapts to immediate circumstances  Trial and error style  Sets objectives  Sets schedules  (AE-RO >5.9; AC-CE ~3.8)  Converger  Good at practical applications  Makes decisions  Focuses efforts  Does well when there is one answer  Evaluates plans  Selects from alternatives  (A€-RO >5,9;AC-CE >3.8) Diverger  Imaginative, good at generating ideas  Can view situation from different angles  Open to experience  Recognizes problems  Investigates  Senses opportunities  (AE-RO ~5.9; AC-CE ~3.8)  Assimilator  Ability to create theoretical models  Compares alternatives  Defines problems  Establishes criteria  Formulates hypotheses  (A€-RO ~5.9; AC-CE >3.8)  100 50 0  Active4 AE - RO b Reflective  (+28) (Median=5.9) (-2 1)  Source: Adapted from Kolb (1984, 86) and Gibbs (1988, 20)  Note: Individual scores can be compared with the standardized percentile scores based on a mixed sample of 1,446 adults  between 18 and 60 in a survey undertaken by Kolb (1985). The average education of the sample was two years of college.  The four learning styles have scores above or below the AE-RO and AC-CE medians. Thus convergers, for example, have an  AE-RO score ~5.9 and an AC-CE score >4.3 (though any individual can only obtain an integer score), whereas divergers have  scores below these median values and often have negative scores.  Figure 2. Characteristics of Kolb's learning styles (adapted from Kolb 1984, 86 and Gibbs 1988, 20).  Accommodators  Commerce  Demography  Education  Environmental studies  Geography  Political science Public policy  Convergers  Applied economics Applied physics  Art history  Computing  Demography Engineering  Forestry Law  Medical Research Divergers  English History  Linguistics  Phi losop hy  Sociology  Assimilators  Astronomy  Chemistry  Classics  Earth sciences  Economics
Phi losop hy  Sociology  Assimilators  Astronomy  Chemistry  Classics  Earth sciences  Economics  Mathematics  Physics  Theoretical physics RO  Figure 3. Disciplinary groupings (Based on Nulty and Barrett 1996, 335).
Kolb’s Experiential Learning Theory 189  individuals learn better when subject matter is pre-  sented in a way that is consistent with their pre-  ferred learning style (Table 1).  Left to their own devices students tend to do  what is easiest for them (i.e., use their own learning  style). Similarly, individual instructors may teach in  ways that reflect their own learning styles, and they  may assume that their students also learn in that  way. Evidence indicates that student learning (or at  least retention) is enhanced as more learning stages  are used (Stice 1987). This confirms Kolb’s argu-  ment that teachers should encourage students to  engage in all four stages of the learning cycle.  Indeed, Kolb (1984,203) suggests that there are  potential long-term benefits when there is an inten-  tional mismatch between learning style and instruc-  tional style on the grounds that,  The aim is to make the student self-renew-  ing and self-directed; to focus on integra-  tive development where the person is high-  ly developed in each of the four learning  modes: active, reflective, abstract and con-  crete. Here, the student is taught to experi-  ence the tension and conflict among these  orientations, for it is from these tensions  that creativity springs.  Kolb (1976) produced a learning style inventory  (LSI 1976) that identifes students’ preferred learning  styles. An updated version (LSI 1985) was produced  nearly a decade later (Kolb 1985). Kolb’s LSI 1985  has been found to be highly reliable, although vari-  ation has been found between disciplines (Willcox-  son and Prosser 1996). The LSI 1985 requires the  ranking of each of 12 sets of four short sentences  about learning (from 1, least like you, to 4, most like  you), which can be completed and self-scored in  about 10 min~tes.~ The subject obtains scores for  Table 1. The relationship between learning style and learning  conditions (after Kolb 1984). each of the four learning stages: CE, RO, AC, and  AE
and learning  conditions (after Kolb 1984). each of the four learning stages: CE, RO, AC, and  AE (ranging from 12 to 48). The AE-RO (active-  reflective) score gives a value for plotting on the  horizontal axis, while the AC-CE (abstract-concrete)  score gives a value for the vertical axis.6  Results using Kolb’s (1976) LSI 1976 have  shown some measure of agreement about clusters  of disciplines based on the learning styles predomi-  nant among their students (Kolb 1981). More agree-  ment is apparent if disciplines are subsumed under  descriptions, such as social sciences or humanities  (Willcoxson and Prosser 1996). It should be noted,  however, that reporting a numerical majority as the  predominant learning style obscures the range of  styles found. Moreover, the groupings are not  absolutely precise because different modes of dis-  course and forms of teaching may be adopted  which are non-traditional to that discipline (Nulty  and Barrett 1996). There is also evidence that learn-  ing styles are related to the stage students are in  their studies. Nulty and Barrett (1986) found that  students in the first third of their studies adopted  learning styles that were similar to each other irre-  spective of main disciplines. However, the learning  styles of students in the final third of their studies  tended to be related to the discipline that was the  primary focus of their studies.  ies. Kolb (1984) found that American students  studying geography favored an assimilative learn-  ing style, while Nulty and Barrett (1996) found that,  in an Australian study, geography students were  predominantly accommodators (Figure 3). Bradbeer  (1999), in commenting on these differences, sug-  gests that in all probability the British picture for  geography would be closer to the Australian than  to the American. However, what is not known is if  the students analyzed were specializing in human  or physical geography. It might be expected that  physical geographers would
specializing in human  or physical geography. It might be expected that  physical geographers would have similar learning  styles to natural scientists (predominantly assimila-  tors, see Figure 3), while human geographers  would have greater similarities with social scientists  (predominantly accommodators, see Figure 3). At  first this seems at variance with the findings in the The position of geography varies between stud-  Learning Style Optimum Learning Conditions  Diverger  Assimilator  Converger  Accommodator United States, where geography is predominantly  human geography. However, in the late 1970s and  early 1980s, applying a scientific method was the  predominant mode of explanation in human geog-  raphy. Today, with the plurality of approaches in  geography, geography students’ need for a flexible  approach to learning has probably never been  stronger. When allowed to observe and gather a  wide range of information  When presented with sound logical  theories to consider  When provided with practical applica-  tions of concepts and theories  When allowed to gain hands-on experi-  ence
190 Healey and Jenkins  APPLYING THE THEORY TO GEOGRAPHY  TEACHING  When we first hear the central ideas of Kolb’s  theory they may well have an intuitive appeal, for  they connect to-even legitimatize-much of what  we do as teachers. As researchers, we may note that  the theory parallels, in part, the (scientific) research  method of observation, hypothesis building, theory,  and testing. Thus, experience parallels observation,  reflection parallels hypothesis building, and so on.  For geographers, it gives a theoretical rationale for  the importance of fieldwork, which many of us  agree should be central to the geography curricu-  lum (Sauer 1956). It can also be readily applied to  our teaching, whether we are teaching the practical  aspects of GIS or the theoretical ideas of feminism.  But like all powerful theories, it takes us beyond  what we already know and transforms how we  conceive and act in our role as geography teachers.  It is important to emphasize that though the theory  stresses the importance of learning from experience,  through activities such as fieldwork or using a com-  puter-based learning package, it is just as relevant  to the planning of a lecture or seminar.  The central practical applications of the theory  include how a session, or a course, can be devel-  oped in a way that takes students systematically  through the whole cycle, as well as a consideration  of the teaching methods that are particularly valu-  able at certain stages of the cycle.  Gibbs (1988) usefully links Kolb’s cycle to edu-  cational practice by relating teaching methods to  four common experiential methods placed within  the sequence of Kolb’s model: planning for experi-  ence, increasing awareness, reviewing and reflect-  ing on experience, and providing substitute experi-  ences (Figure 4). For example, under planning for  experience (a stage spanning conceptualization and  experimentation), Kolb includes action plans and  learning contracts. Under reviewing and
and  experimentation), Kolb includes action plans and  learning contracts. Under reviewing and reflecting  on experience (which spans experience and reflec-  tion), he suggests structured discussions, peer  appraisal, and self-assessment. Svinicki and Dixon  (1994) provide a similar list of instructional activi-  ties that may support different aspects of the learn-  ing cycle.  In setting out the pedagogic implications of  Kolb’s theory, Gibbs (1988,9) argues, ”It is not  enough just to do, and neither is it enough just to  think. Nor is it enough simply to do and think.  Learning from experience must involve linking the  doinn and the thinking-.” We demonstrate this bv showing how, as geographers, we could systemati-  cally take students through the cycle. Based on real  courses, the following descriptions demonstrate  more clearly the practical applications of the theory.  Teaching How Theories of Gender Explain  Aspects of Suburbia  In an Opening Lecture  Stage 1 (CE). Students individually read brief  excerpts from three or four novels that  describe aspects of living in suburbia. This  gives them a ”substitute” concrete experience.  Stage 2 (RO). In groups of 3 or 4, students consider  key questions, such as does it appear that  these experiences were differently shaped by  gender? Here, students are being required to  reflect back on their reading and are being  primed for the next theoretical stage.  Stage 3 (AC). A fifteen-minute lecture sets out key  ideas in how contrasting gender theorists  have analyzed the suburban landscape and  identified different understandings of the  concept of landscape. This is the abstract con-  ceptualization phase.  Stage 4 (AE). Students are directed to the section of  the course guide concerned with assessment  and to the course reader. The reader includes  articles that exemplify contrasting theoretical  positions on gender and landscape that were  outlined in the 15-minute lecture. Each stu-  dent group of 3 or 4 is
and landscape that were  outlined in the 15-minute lecture. Each stu-  dent group of 3 or 4 is allocated one of these  theoretical positions and directed to present  at the next class session a poster that illus-  trates how that theory would explain aspects  of suburbia. In this stage students are actively  experimenting with a theoretical position(s).  In the Next Class Session  Stage 5 (CE). Students display their posters and  view posters from other groups (experience).  Stage 6 (RO). In small groups, students discuss  questions that push them to reflect on the  posters and theoretical positions presented.  At this stage, questions may be directing  them to look for links between, and inconsis-  tencies in, the theories. Though the teacher  leads this stage, the students are doing most  of the talking and the thinking (reflection).  session draws out the different theoretical Stage 7 (AC). In this key stage a teacher-led plenary  ” ” --- 192 Healey and Jenkins  Teaching a Field Course  Before the Field Course  Stage 1 (AC). Students are required to read about  competing theories on the geography of post-  industrial societies.  ject groups plan questions with defined inter-  est groups and set up interviews for the open-  ing days of the field course. Stage 2 (AE). To test these models, students in pro-  During the Field Course  Stage 3 (CE). Initial field interviews.  Stage 4 (RO). Structured discussion, or journal writ-  Stage 5 (AC). Tentative statement about validity of ing, that encourages the student to reflect.  models as applied to this location/interest  group.  Stage 6 (AE). Planning questions to further test  revised model in subsequent interviews.  Stage 7 (CE). Further interviews.  The cycle can be maintained, but at some point  (probably at AC or AE) there is closure.  Making Students More Aware of Themselves  as Learners  In the initial session of a first-year introductory  geography course, the faculty uses the following  activities to help students reflect on themselves as  learners and to explain the variety of teaching  methods and the teaching philosophy they will  encounter as geography majors.  They are first asked to think of one context  where, in their view, they individually have effec-  tively learnt something outside the classroom. They  are then asked to explain to another student how  they went about that learning. On the basis of the  discussion within these pairs, the instructor builds  up the variety of ways students have learned. At  this stage the instructor is developing an implicit  classroom culture that values different ways of  learning, but introducing no explicit theory or con-  clusion as to how people learn. Students then indi-  vidually complete one of the learning style invento-  ries (e.g., Kolb 1985, Honey and Mumford 1992).  Students are formally introduced to experiential  learning theory and the implications for them as  learners, both individually
Kolb ’s Experiential Learning Theory 191  positions and what they reveal about subur-  bia (conceptualization).  Stage 8 (AE). Students individually (or in groups)  write an analysis of a novel (or film) from one  of the theoretical positions analyzed thus far  (experimentation).  At this point the course moves on to another  topic where Kolb’s theory may be again used to  Planning for experience  Experience  Conceptualization  Action plans  Setting objectives  Designing experiments  Observation checklists  Devising criteria  Learning contracts  Action research  Reviewing and reflecting upon experience  Experience  Experimentation Reflection  Conceptualization  Diaries  Using video and audio recordings  Peer appraisal  Structured discussions  Structured de-briefing Self assessment  Reflection checklists and questionnaires  ‘Shared time’ and ‘mutual interviewing’  Modelling reflection structure the learning experience. The hope, of  course, is that students will reflect back on the  course and use the method of analysis (AE) the next  time they drive through suburbia (CE). Students  might discuss that experience with other people  (RO) and perhaps suggest that if others read this  theory (AC), they would see the landscape differ-  ently and their experience would be transformed by  that learning.  Increasing awareness of experience  Experience  Experimentation Reflection  Conceptualization  Log books  Listening exercises  Questions  Increasing awareness of feelings  Silent demonstrations  Providing substitute experiences  Experience  Conceptualization  Case studies Games Simulations  Role plays  Assessing through substitute experiences  Figure 4. Practical methods to implement the experiential learning cycle (based on Gibbs 1988, 23-63).
to experiential  learning theory and the implications for them as  learners, both individually and collectively. It is  emphasized that although they may have a pre- ferred learning style, it is important that they are  able to use a range of learning styles to improve  their overall learning in a variety of situations.  Finally, the teaching team describes how this intro-  ductory module, and the geography program as a  whole, is structured to recognize individual student  learning styles. This exercise was particularly effec-  tive because the teaching team had previously  undertaken the staff development exercise  described below.  Encouraging Staff Members to Rethink Their  Teaching Style  As part of a department retreat, staff members  experienced a set of exercises similar to those their  students encountered the following year (see  above). After the staff understood and discussed  the basic features of the theory, each teacher applied  it to the way that one of the courses for which he or  she was individually responsible was taught. Staff  members were then challenged to redesign that  course, making more explicit use of Kolb’s theory.  This exercise was followed by discussions on  the validity of the theory and on staff members’  practical concerns about applying it. These discus-  sions were well informed and effective because the  staff had experience in applying the theory, as well  as in reflecting on that experience. Thus, a very con-  structive discussion ensued around identifying  types of teaching associated with developing partic-  ular learning styles (Figure 4) and how a linked set  of GIS computer labs could be restructured to take  students systematically through the cycle.  to consider a particular geography course. Two  groups considered the first-semester introductory  course, one of which designed the activities  described above. Other groups considered the final-  year capstone course, as well as other courses that  were taken by most
considered the final-  year capstone course, as well as other courses that  were taken by most geography majors. Just as they  had done with their individual course, the project  groups applied the theory to these more collective  courses, first analyzing the courses as currently  taught, and then redesigning them making explicit  use of the theory.  Though there were some reservations and dis-  agreements, the department decided to require  selected key courses to be redesigned to explicitly  use Kolb’s theory. A budget and time frame for  implementation over three years was agreed upon,  starting the following academic year with the intro-  ductory course and the activity described above. Staff members were divided into project groups
Kolb’s Experiential Learning Theoy 193  As previously stated, the case studies, although  based on real examples, have been written to make  more explicit the use of Kolb’s theory and to ensure  that they are immediately relevant to geographers.  Other published examples of geographers using the  theory were referred to in the introduction, and  give further pointers to the theory’s potential for  improving student learning in the discipline.  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION  Teachers developing courses using experiential  methods, including the learning cycle, need to be  reassured that this does not mean rejecting what  they usually do or adopting wholesale Kolb’s theo-  ry and its associated practical applications. The  approach can be readily developed from what we  already do. For example, a simple introduction of  reflective elements into a lecture can be a way for  students and teachers alike to gain confidence in  using the the~ry.~  In presenting Kolb’s theory we argue that it  presents teachers of all disciplines with key insights  and practical applications from cognitive and  behavioral psychology. Entwistle (1991), one of  Britain’s major theorists on higher education,  argues that this well-developed literature demon-  strates that teachers should  take full account of the range of learning  styles that any class or group of students  will exhibit;  recognize that the teachers’ own learning  styles are likely to shape their teaching  and the approaches they adopt to course  design; and  avoid the dangers of allowing one partic-  ular approach to teaching to exclude the  others. perspective of Bigg (1999, xii), with its theoretical  arguments that course design or teaching is  ”enhanced by aligning objectives, teaching meth-  ods, and assessment tasks.”  Since Kolb’s theory was first proposed in the  mid-l970s, several writers have suggested alter-  ations.8 Nevertheless, we commend the experiential learning theory for being a well-developed theory  that has
we commend the experiential learning theory for being a well-developed theory  that has now received careful analysis and some  testing in the educational research community. We  are particularly drawn to it for the reasons that we  have discussed in this article. It is a theory whose  central features are relatively easy to grasp and that  can be readily applied to an individual session by  one teacher or to a degree program taught by  many.9  our concerns with students learning directly from  the environment, particularly in fieldwork. Its par-  ticular appeal to us is that it legitimates the wide  variety of teaching methods that have now been  developed by geographers, and also gives us theo-  retical and practical pointers to improvement. Cru-  cially, Kolb’s ideas still allow  us, as teachers, to  emphasize the particular stages of the cycle which  fit with our own learning and teaching styles, as  long as we take our students through the entire  cycle. However, the characteristic learning styles of  geography students remain unclear. It is important  that we establish whether geography students in  higher education in the early twenty-first century  have a predominant learning style and whether this  varies between countries and the stage students are  in their studies. For geographers it has a ready connection to  Authors‘ Note: Many colleagues helped in the preparation of this arti-  cle by pointing out useful references. We are particularly grateful to  John Bradbeer and David Robotkam for their comments on an earlier  draft of the article and for David‘s permission to quotefrom an unpub-  lished paper.  However, in presenting the value of the experi-  ential learning theory to geographers, we need to  be careful not to privilege it above other theorists  who seek to explain student learning. For example,  we commend the work of Prosser and Trigwell  (1999), who bring together the extensive literature  on deep and surface learning (i.e., how students
who bring together the extensive literature  on deep and surface learning (i.e., how students  approach their studies) to argue for a pedagogy  that starts from teachers investigating individual  student’s prior conceptions of what they are study-  ing. Bradbeer (1999) uses this work to suggest how  geographers can approach the design of interdisci-  plinary courses. Given most state systems’ focus on  assessment, we also commend the constructivist NOTES  1 David Kolb’s experiential learning theory is one of the  best-known educational theories in higher education (Kolb  and Fry 1975, Kolb 1984) and is frequently cited in the lit-  erature on geography in higher education in the UK. How-  ever, judging from the published literature and the  responses we received to an inquiry we placed on the  International Geographical Union Commission on Geo-  graphic Education (IGU-CGE) listserve, the theory appears  to be less well-known among geographers in North Ameri-  ca and elsewhere. This is surprising given that Kolb is an  American organizational psychologist whose work has  attracted considerable attention in North America, particu-  larly in the education, management, and psychology litera-  ture (see, for example, the 12-page bibliography at the end  of Smith and Kolb 119861). We hope that the next time  someone surveys the application of Kolb in geography,
194 Healey and Jenkins  4  5  6  9 there will be a wide range of US and other non-UK exam-  ples of its use.  Readers interested in the application of Kolb’s ideas at the  curriculum level may find the story of the change and  invention at Weatherhead School of Management intrigu-  ing (Boyatzis et al. 1995).  Kolbs model can be used as a description of learning  processes in general (Henry 1989), but his emphasis on  reflection places it firmly in the experience-based learning  camp. The importance of reflection is emphasized by Bore-  ham (1987,89), who notes that ”the term ’learning from  experience’ really means learning from reflection on expe-  rience.” Boud et al. (1985) make a similar point in coining  a slogan for the title of their book Reflection: Turning Experi-  ence into Learning. Without reflection on experience, stu-  dents are in danger of continuing to make the same mis-  takes.  In brief, Kolb conceptualizes the process of action research  as “a spiral of action and research consisting of four major  moments: plan, act, observe and reflect ” (Zuber-Skerritt  1992b, 11). Race (1993) has proposed a variant on Kolb’s  model by using more everyday language. He refers to the  stages as wanting, doing, feedback, and digesting; and  Race’s model has been used by one of the authors (Healey  1998) to explore the nature of the learning process with  several groups of geography students and staff.  We found difficulty in obtaining a library copy of Kolb’s  1985 Learning Style Inventory in the UK; and we are grate-  ful to Kathryn Booth, who lent us hers. Fortunately, read-  ers wishing to use the LSI may find a copy of the 48 items  used for identifying predominant learning style in Loo  (1999,219). The full LSI may be obtained directly from the  publisher (McBer, Boston, Massachusetts). Details may be  found at <http:/ /trgmcber.haygroup.com/learning/  lsius.htm>.  The resulting single point identifies the subject as diverger,  assimilator, converger, or
The resulting single point identifies the subject as diverger,  assimilator, converger, or accommodator (Figure 2). Other  researchers have also produced their own learning style  inventories. For example, Honey and Mumford (1986)  adapted Kolb’s inventory and used simpler language:  pragmatist, reflector, theorist, and activist. They also give  advice on how to make the best use of one’s learning style,  how to improve each style, and how to choose learning  activities to suit one’s style.  Both Gibbs (1988) and Svinicki and Dixon (1994) provide  excellent advice for teachers who decide to adopt this  approach.  Cowan (1998) provides many intriguing examples of his  overstretched spring model, which incorporates ideas from  both Kolb (1984) and Schon (1983). Mann (1999), on the  other hand, has modified the theory to make it more  developmental. Bradford (2000) provides an application of  Mann’s model in geography. Kolb’s theory has also attract-  ed many critiques, both from a theoretical viewpoint (e.g.,  Holman et al. 1997) and an applied perspective (e.g.,  November 1997). There is much debate in the literature  about the effectiveness of matching teaching methods to  learning styles. Robotham (1999) found that “for each  research study supporting the principle of matching  instructional style and learning style there is a study reject-  ing the matching hypothesis.” Fielding (1994,403), more-  over, emphasizes that ”Learning styles are flexible struc-  tures, not immutable personality traits.” This raises the  question of the extent to which learning styles are stable or  changeable. However, the evidence is unclear, as Roboth-  am (1999) concludes, “Research into the relative stability of  learning style ... remains both confusing and confused.”  Despite some questions which have been raised about the  reliability of Kolb’s learning style inventory, it is clear that  using it with students helps them to improve their learn-  ing effectiveness in different
that  using it with students helps them to improve their learn-  ing effectiveness in different learning situations (Loo 1997). REFERENCES  Anderson, J. A,, and M. Adams. 1992. Acknowledging the learn-  ing styles of diverse student populations: Implications for  instructional design. In Teaching for Diversity, eds., N. Chism  and L. Border, pp. 19-33. San Francisco, California: Jossey-  Bass.  Biggs, J. 1999. Teachingfor Quality Learning at University. Milton  Keynes, UK Society for Research into Higher Education and  Open University Press.  Birnie, J., and K. Mason O’Connor. 1998. Practicals and Laboratory  Work in Geography. Cheltenham, UK: Geography Discipline  Network, Cheltenham and Gloucester College of Higher  Education.  Boreham, N. C. 1987. Learning from experience in diagnostic  problem solving. In Student Learning: Research in Education  and Cognitive Psychology, eds., J. T. E. Richardson, M. W.  Eysenck, and D. W. Piper, pp. 89-97. Milton Keynes, UK  Society for Research into Higher Education and Open Uni-  versity Press.  Boud, D., R. Keogh, and D. Walker, eds. 1985. Reflection: Turning  Experience into Learning. London, UK Kogan Page.  Boyatzis, R. E., S. S. Cowen, D. A. Kolb, and Associates. 1995.  Innovation in Professional Education: Steps on a Journey from  Teaching to Learning. San Francisco, California: Jossey-Bass.  Bradbeer, J. 1999. Barriers to interdisciplinarity: Disciplinary dis-  courses and student learning. Journal of Geography in Higher  Education 23:381-396.  Bradford, M. 2000. Improving Students’ Team and Personal Skills.  Cheltenham, UK Geography Discipline Network, Chel-  tenham and Gloucester College of Higher Education.  Brown, G. H. 1999. A group-learning approach to academic and  transferable skills through an exercise in the global position-  ing system. Journal of Geography in Higher Education  Burkill S., D. Corey, and M. Healey 2000. Improving Students’ 23:291-301.  Communication Skills in Geography. Cheltenham, UK Geogra- --- from <http:/ /www.chelt.ac.uk/gdn/discuss/index.htm>.  Sauer, C. 0.1956. The education of a geographer. Annals of Asso-  ciation of American Geographers 46:287-289.  Schon, D. 1983. The Reflective Practitioner. New York Basic Books.  Shepherd, I. 1998. Teaching and Learning Geography with lnforma-  tion and Communication Technologies. Cheltenham, UK Geog-  raphy Discipline Network, Cheltenham and Gloucester Col-  lege of Higher Education.  Style Inventory: A Manual for Teachers and Trainers. Boston,  Massachusetts: McBer.  Stice, J. E. 1987. Using Kolb’s learning cycle to improve student  learning. Engineering Education 77:291-296.  Svinicki, M. D., and N. M. Dixon. 1994. The Kolb model modi-  fied for classroom activities. In Teaching and Learning in the  College Classroom, eds., K. A. Feldman and M. B. Paulsen, pp.  307-315. Needham Heights, Massachusetts: Ginn Press.  Inventory (1985): Review and further study of validity and  reliability. British Journal of Educational Psychology 66:251-261.  Zuber-Skerritt, 0. 1992a. Professional Development in Higher Educa-  tion: A Theoretical Framework for Action Research. London, UK  Kogan Page.  Zuber-Skerritt, 0. 1992b. Action Research in Higher Education:  Examples and Reflections. London, UK: Kogan Page. Smith, D. M., and D. Kolb. 1986. Users’ Guide for the Learning  Willcoxson, L., and M. Prosser. 1996. Kolb’s Learning Style
2000. Improving Students’ 23:291-301.  Communication Skills in Geography. Cheltenham, UK Geogra-  phy Discipline Network, Cheltenham and Gloucester College  of Higher Education.  based Learning in Geography. Cheltenham, UK: Geography  Discipline Network, Cheltenham and Gloucester College of  Higher Education.  Cowan, J. 1998. On Becoming an Innovative University Teacher:  Reflection in Action. Milton Keynes, UK: Open University.  Entwistle, N. J. 1991. Cognitive style and learning. In The Founda-  tions of Student Learning, ed., K. Marjoribanks. Oxford, UK:  Pergamon.  Building on Kolb’s learning styles to develop a language of  teaching and learning. The Curriculum Journal 5:393417.  Gardner, H. 1999. The Disciplined Mind: What All Students Should  Understand. New York Simon and Schuster.  Geography for the New Undergraduate. 1999. Tutor Guide. Liver-  pool, UK. Liverpool Hope University College.  Gibbs, G. 1988. Learning by Doing: A Guide to Teaching and Learn-  ing Methods. London, UK: Further Education Unit.  Gibbs, G., ed. 1992. Teaching More Students Projects. Oxford, UK  Polytechnics and Colleges Funding Council and Oxford  Polytechnic.  Gold, J. R., A. Jenkins, R. Lee, J. Monk, J. Riley, I. D. H. Shepherd,  and D. J. Unwin. 1991. Teaching Geography in Higher Educa-  tion: A Manual of Good Practice. Oxford, U.K.: Basil Blackwell. Chalkley, B., and J. Harwood. 1998. Transferable Skills and Work-  Fielding, M. 1994. Valuing difference in teachers and learners:
Kolb’s Experiential Leavning Theory 195  Gravestock, P., and M. Healey, eds. 1998. Guides to Good Teaching,  Learning and Assessment Practices in Geography. Cheltenham,  UK Geography Discipline Network, Cheltenham and  Gloucester College of Higher Education.  development of personal transferable skills. Journal of Geogra-  phy in Higher Education 23:195-206.  tenham, UK: Geography Discipline Network, Cheltenham  and Gloucester College of Higher Education.  Henry, J. 1989. Meaning and practice in experiential learning. In  Making Sense of Experiential Learning: Diversity in Theory and  Practice, eds., S. W. Weil and I. McGill, pp. 25-37. Milton  Keynes, UK Society for Research into Higher Education and  Open University Press.  Hertzog, C. J., and C. Lieble 1996. A study of two techniques for  teaching introductory geography: Traditional approach ver-  sus cooperative learning in the university classroom. Journal  of Geography 95:274-280.  theory of experiential learning in management education:  The construction of social constructionism and activity theo-  ry Management Learning 28:135-148.  Honey, P., and A. Mumford. 1986. Using Your Learning Styles.  Maidenhead, UK: Peter Honey.  Honey, P., and A. Mumford. 1992. The Manual of Learning Styles.  Maidenhead, UK Peter Honey.  Jenkins, A. 1997. Fieldwork with More Students. Oxford, UK  Oxford Centre for Staff and Learning Development.  Jenkins, A. 1998. Curriculum Design in Geography. Cheltenham,  UK: Geography Discipline Network, Cheltenham and  Gloucester College of Higher Education.  Kolb, D. A. 1976. Learning Style Inventory. Boston, Massachusetts:  McBer.  Kolb, D. A. 1981. Learning styles and disciplinary differences. In  The Modern American College, eds., A. W. Chickering and  Associates, pp. 232-255. San Francisco, California: Jossey-  Bass.  Kolb, D. A. 1984. Experiential Learning: Experience as the Source of  Learning and Development. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey:  Prentice-Hall.  Kolb, D. A. 1985. Learning
Learning and Development. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey:  Prentice-Hall.  Kolb, D. A. 1985. Learning Style Inventory. Revised edition.  Boston, Massachusetts: McBer.  Kolb, D., and R. Fry. 1975. Towards an applied theory of experi-  ential learning. In Theories of Group Processes, ed., C. L. Cop-  per, pp. 33-58. London, UK John Wiley.  Loo, R. 1997. Using Kolb’s Learning Style Inventory (LSI 1985) in  the classroom. Proceedings of the Association of Management Haigh, M., and M. P. Kilmartin 1999. Student perceptions of the  Healey, M. 1998. Resource-based Learning in Geography. Chel-  Holman, D., K. Pavlica, and R. Thorpe. 1997. Rethinking Kolb’s  15:47-51. Loo, R. 1999. Confirmatory factor analysis of Kolb’s Learning  Style Inventory (LSI-1985). British Journal ofEducationa1 Psy-  chology 691213-219.  Mann, P. 1999. Can we make development training developmen-  Mellor, A. 1991. Experiential learning through integrated project tal? Public Administration and Development 19:105-116.  work: An example from soil science. Journal of Geography in  Higher Education 15:135-149.  November, P. 1997. Learning to teach experientially: A pilgrim’s  progress. Studies in Higher Education 22:289-299.  Nulty, D. D., and M. A. Barrett. 1996. Transitions in students’  learning styles. Studies in Higher Education 21:333-345.  Prosser, M., and K. Trigwell. 1999. Understanding Learning and  Teaching: The Experience of Higher Education. Buckingham, UK:  Society for Higher Education and Open University Press.  Race, P. 1993. Never Mind the Teaching Feel the Learning. SEDA  Paper 80. Birmingham, UK Staff and Educational Develop-  ment Association.  Robotham, D. 1995. Self-directed learning: The ultimate learning  style? Journal of European Industrial Training 19(7):3-7.  Robotham, D. 1999. The application of learning style theory in  higher education teaching. Unpublished article. Available  from <http:/ /www.chelt.ac.uk/gdn/discuss/index.htm>.  Sauer, C. 0.1956. The education of a
El texto proporciona un análisis exhaustivo del artículo "Kolb's Experiential Learning Theory and Its Application in Geography in Higher Education", escrito por Mick Healey y Alan Jenkins, publicado en el Journal of Geography. Este artículo se centra en la teoría del aprendizaje experiencial de David Kolb y su aplicación en la enseñanza de la geografía en la educación superior, destacando su relevancia y utilidad en este contexto.

### Detalles del Artículo
- **Autores**: Mick Healey y Alan Jenkins.
- **Publicación**: Journal of Geography, volumen 99, número 5, páginas 185-195.
- **Fecha de publicación**: 16 de agosto de 2007 (escrito en 2000).
- **Identificadores**: ISSN impreso 0022-1341, ISSN en línea 1752-6868, DOI 10.1080/00221340008978967.
- **Acceso**: Disponible en https://doi.org/10.1080/00221340008978967.

### Visibilidad y Citaciones
El artículo ha tenido un impacto significativo, con 94,948 visualizaciones y 67 citaciones en otros trabajos, lo que indica su relevancia en el ámbito de la geografía y la educación superior. Se menciona que los términos y condiciones de acceso y uso del contenido del journal están disponibles en su página web.

### Contexto de la Teoría de Kolb
La teoría del aprendizaje experiencial de Kolb, desarrollada en 1984, define el aprendizaje como un proceso en el que se crea conocimiento a través de la transformación de la experiencia. Esta teoría propone un ciclo de aprendizaje que consta de cuatro etapas: experiencia concreta, reflexión, conceptualización abstracta y experimentación activa. Cada etapa se asocia con diferentes estilos de aprendizaje, lo que implica que los individuos tienen preferencias distintas en su forma de aprender.

### Importancia de Reconocer Estilos de Aprendizaje
El texto enfatiza la necesidad de que tanto estudiantes como docentes reconozcan sus estilos de aprendizaje. Comprender estas diferencias es crucial para aumentar la conciencia de los estudiantes sobre enfoques alternativos y fomentar su flexibilidad ante diversas situaciones de aprendizaje. Además, se menciona que una discrepancia significativa entre el estilo del aprendiz y el enfoque del docente puede afectar negativamente el aprendizaje.

### Desafíos en la Educación Superior
El artículo también aborda la creciente importancia de aspectos como el acceso, la diversidad y las tasas de retención en la educación superior. Se sugiere que la aplicación de la teoría de Kolb puede contribuir a abordar estos desafíos, promoviendo un enfoque de aprendizaje activo que reconozca y valore la diversidad de género y cultural, así como las diferencias individuales en los estilos de aprendizaje.

### Aplicaciones Prácticas de la Teoría
Healey y Jenkins presentan estudios de caso que ilustran cómo se puede aplicar la teoría de Kolb en la enseñanza de la geografía en la universidad. Se destaca que la teoría no solo es relevante para la enseñanza de aspectos prácticos, como el Sistema de Información Geográfica (GIS), sino también para conceptos teóricos, como el feminismo. La teoría de Kolb proporciona un marco para estructurar sesiones o cursos completos, guiando a los estudiantes a través de todo el ciclo de aprendizaje.

### Estilos de Aprendizaje según Kolb
Kolb identifica cuatro estilos de aprendizaje:
1. **Divergentes**: Analizan situaciones desde múltiples perspectivas y son creativos en la generación de ideas.
2. **Convergentes**: Aplican teorías a situaciones prácticas y son buenos en la resolución de problemas.
3. **Acomodadores**: Se enfocan en la ejecución de planes y experimentos, adaptándose a las circunstancias.
4. **Asimiladores**: Integran información y desarrollan teorías a partir de datos observados.

### Implicaciones para la Enseñanza de la Geografía
El artículo argumenta que la teoría de Kolb puede ayudar a los estudiantes a desarrollar autoconciencia, fomentar la reflexión y contribuir al desarrollo de habilidades clave. Se menciona su utilidad en el diseño de proyectos grupales y en la mejora del currículo de geografía. Además, se establece un paralelismo entre la teoría de Kolb y la teoría de las inteligencias múltiples de Gardner, subrayando la importancia de reconocer los diferentes estilos de aprendizaje.

### Conclusiones
El texto concluye que la teoría del aprendizaje experiencial de Kolb es un marco valioso para la educación superior, especialmente en la enseñanza de la geografía. Se enfatiza la necesidad de adaptar las metodologías de enseñanza a los diferentes estilos de aprendizaje de los estudiantes para promover un aprendizaje efectivo y significativo. Además, se sugiere que la implementación de esta teoría puede mejorar la experiencia educativa de los estudiantes, fomentando un aula diversa y consciente que reconozca la importancia de la reflexión y la retroalimentación en el proceso de aprendizaje.

En resumen, el artículo de Healey y Jenkins destaca la relevancia de la teoría del aprendizaje experiencial de Kolb en la educación superior, subrayando la necesidad de reconocer y valorar la diversidad en los estilos de aprendizaje para mejorar la experiencia educativa de los estudiantes en el campo de la geografía.
