July 2009 Journal of Engineering Education 283Applying Kolb’s Experiential Learning Cycle for Laboratory Education MAHMOUD ABDULWAHED Engineering Center of Excellence in Teaching and Learning Loughborough University ZOLTAN K N AGY Chemical Engineering DepartmentLoughborough University  ABSTRACT This paper describes a model for laboratory education based onKolb’s experiential learning theory. The method is implementedusing modern teaching technologies and a combination of remote,virtual, and hands-on laboratory sessions and have been applied tothe teaching of the undergraduate process control laboratory at theChemical Engineering Department at Loughborough University,United Kingdom. An argument that poor learning in the labora-tory is due to insufficient activation of the prehension dimensionof Kolb’s cycle was suggested and verified, providing a pedagogicalexplanation. The quantitative analysis showed significantenhancement of the learning outcomes of the experimental groupcompared with the control group. Apart from the hands-onsession, the proposed model involves additional activities, such aspre- and post-lab tests and virtual laboratory sessions, which areassociated with Kolb’s cycle to facilitate constructivist learning.The paper provides the first laboratory education model thatbuilds thoroughly on Kolb’s experiential learning theory. Keywords: Kolb’s experiential learning, laboratory engineering education, remote and virtual laboratories I. INTRODUCTION The importance of laboratory experience in engineering educa- tion curricula has been emphasized in a large number of science andengineering education articles (Feisel, 2005; Hofstein and Lunetta,2004; Johnstone and Al-Shuaili, 2001; Kirschner, 1988; Ma andNickerson, 2006). The essential role of laboratories can be correlatedwith the fact that engineering is, in general, an applied science thatrequires hands-on skills and involves elements of design, problemsolving, and analytical thinking. Well designed
skills and involves elements of design, problemsolving, and analytical thinking. Well designed laboratories duringundergraduate engineering degrees may well improve these skills ofthe future engineers.  Engineering had been taught as a primarily hands-on subject up to the 18th century. However, engineering education has benefitedfrom the advances in science and it began to embed deeper theoret-ical concepts by the end of the 19th century, especially in the U.S.schools initially (Feisel, 2005). Since then, the pedagogical emphasis in engineering education has been shifted more towards classroomand lecture-based education, and in many schools, less attentionhas been given to the laboratory education, particularly during thelast 30 years (Hofstein and Lunetta, 1982; Hofstein and Lunetta,2004; Feisel and Peterson, 2002). Wankat (2004) observed thatonly 6 percent of the articles published in the Journal of Engineering Education from 1993–2002 had “laboratory” as a keyword. Labora- tory pedagogy has been recently reported to be a fertile arena ofresearch for the coming years (Feisel and Rosa, 2005; Hofsteinand Lunetta, 2004), especially in the context of the increasing needto make more use of the new developments in information andcommunication technology (ICT) for enhancing the laboratoryeducation.  The impact of laboratory education on students’ learning is often not recognized (Roth, 1994). One reason for rethinking therole of the laboratory in engineering and science education is the re-cent shift towards constructivist pedagogy in which the importanceof knowledge gained via experience is emphasized. Furthermore,constructivist pedagogy places a larger role on student autonomy inthe learning process. This is particularly important in light of therecent increase in the needs of industry for engineering graduateswho are autonomous and equipped with good hands-on skills.Enhancing laboratory education can serve as a motivating factortoward an engineering career.  Despite
laboratory education can serve as a motivating factortoward an engineering career.  Despite the important role of laboratories in engineering educa- tion, several researchers have reported that the expected benefits oflaboratories on students’ learning are not achieved in most of thecases (Hofestein and Lunetta, 2004; Roth, 1994). In their literaturereview, Ma and Nickerson (2006) found that 100 percent of the ar-ticles concerning hands-on laboratories considered that labs shouldbe platforms for facilitating conceptual understanding, and 65 per-cent considered that laboratories should also facilitate the designskills. However, constructing knowledge is a complex processwhich is often out of the timeframe of the planned laboratory ses-sions. Knowledge construction has four main phases according toKolb’s experiential learning theory (1984), including stimulation,reflection, abstraction, and experimentation. Meaningful learningis an iterative process requiring reflection (Hofestein and Lunetta,2004). These practices are generally missing in the classical hands-on taught laboratories. Gunstone (1991) considers that laboratorieswhich are taught in the classical way can barely be considered asplatforms of knowledge construction, since students have less timeto interact and reflect while they are busy with the technical and theoperational side of the lab. Kirschner (1988) points out the mainshortcomings in some of the hands-on laboratory sessions, includ-ing that students are often required to solve problems that are moredifficult than their cognitive abilities, students are constrained withthe short time periods the labs normally offer, and teachers assume
that students will be able to overcome the problems in the assigned time (Kirschner, 1988). Kirschner also describes that classical labsare usually taught as one single demonstration due to economicaland logistical reasons; however, forming and understanding conceptsrequire repetition (Kirschener, 1988). There is a general consensusthat laboratory work generates poor learning outcomes compared tothe time, effort, and costs invested in laboratory education(Hofestein and Lunetta, 2004; Johnstone and Al-Shuaili, 2001;Kirschner, 1988; Ma and Nickerson, 2006). One possible reasonfor the poor learning outcomes is that engineering labs are very sel-dom designed based on well defined constructivist pedagogicalmodels. One of the suitable pedagogical models for engineeringeducation is Kolb’s experiential learning framework. Kolb’s experi-ential learning cycle is particularly suitable for engineering educa-tion which  is an experiential field of science (Bender, 2001; Felderet al., 2000). Based on Kolb’s theory, Moor and Piergiovanni(2003) justified the advantages of blending classroom theory withexperiments. Kamis and Topi (2007) examined three hypotheses ofpedagogical design for enhancing the problem solving in the field ofnetworks subnettings. Two of them were based on Kolb’s modelwhile the third was based on the advance organizer technique(Ausubel, 1968). Bender (2001) explained a major reform of thecourses taught at the Engineering Design department at the Tech-nical University of Berlin using Kolb’s theory and described theimportance of incorporating the four dimensions of learning in thedesign of lectures. Lagoudas et al. (2000) restructured five core un-dergraduate engineering courses using Kolb’s cycle as a pedagogicalbackground for this process. They relied on computer software andsimulations in their implementation of Kolb’s theory (Lagoudas et al.,2000). Plett et al. (2006) redesigned three engineering coursesbuilding upon Kolb theories and the 4MAT system. The
al. (2006) redesigned three engineering coursesbuilding upon Kolb theories and the 4MAT system. The trialcourse (Introduction to Robotics) was very successful and led to asuccessful NSF grant proposal for curriculum design, in which theyaim to redesign a series of systems courses based on theKolb/4MAT pedagogical model. David and Wyrick (2002) assessedthe learning styles of industrial engineering students over a ten-yearperiod and used Kolb’s experiential learning cycle as a pedagogicalbasis for designing learning experiences for the students. One keyfinding in their study was that providing balanced learning experi-ences to the students, based on the four stages of Kolb’s cycle, hadled to deeper learning and longer retention of information. Stice(1987) also implemented teaching strategies in the class that can ac-commodate all four stages of Kolb’s cycle to improve the learningprocess for undergraduate students.  A thorough literature review on engineering laboratory design, in particular in the context of incorporating new technologies suchas virtual and/or remote labs, reveals that the majority of papers aretechnically focused. This paper describes a new approach for lab-oratory education, which is underpinned by Kolb’s experientiallearning theory (Kolb, 1984). The method uses a combination ofvirtual, remote, and hands-on laboratory sessions and pre- andpost-lab tests to maximize the information retention of students byactivating the stages of Kolb’s learning cycle. The approach hasbeen used in the teaching of the second year undergraduate ProcessControl Laboratory in the Chemical Engineering Department atLoughborough University, United Kingdom. Qualitative andquantitative statistical analyses of the effectiveness of the methodare presented. It is shown that the usually poor knowledge retentionin laboratory education can be explained by the inefficient activationof the prehension dimension of Kolb’s learning cycle. A methodol- ogy is proposed based on applying a
the prehension dimension of Kolb’s learning cycle. A methodol- ogy is proposed based on applying a Virtual Laboratory environ-ment to provide a preparatory session before the hands-on laborato-ry to facilitate reflective preparation for the lab. The results showthat significant enhancement of the laboratory learning process canbe achieved by designing and applying a combination of in-classremote, virtual pre-lab, and hands-on laboratory sessions accordingto Kolb’s experiential learning model. This paper embraces the Kolb’sconstructivist model as pedagogical basis of designing enhancedlaboratory education. II. K OLB ’SEXPERIENTIAL LEARNING THEORY Kolb (1984) introduced his theory on experiential learning more than 20 years ago, which has been well accepted as an effi-cient pedagogical model of learning. Kolb’s experiential learningtheory provides clear mechanisms of teaching and learning design,which are strongly underlined with the constructivist view on theway people construct their knowledge. Kolb suggested that effec-tive learners should have four types of abilities: (1) Concrete Expe-rience ability (CE), (2) Reflective Observation ability (RO), (3)Abstract Conceptualization ability (AC), and (4) active Experi-mentation ability (AE). Hence, the optimal learning takes place when learners have ade- quate balance of these four stages during their learning experience.According to Kolb, learning requires that individuals first shoulddetect, depict, or grasp knowledge, and then a phase of constructionshould take place to complete the learning process. This construc-tion is a transformation of the grasped knowledge into a mentalmodel through experiencing this knowledge. Kolb proposed thatthe optimal learning would pass through a cycle of the ConcreteExperience, Reflective Observation, Abstract Conceptualization,and Active Experimentation. This is called Kolb’s experientiallearning cycle and is shown schematically in Figure 1. The verticalaxis represents the knowledge
cycle and is shown schematically in Figure 1. The verticalaxis represents the knowledge grasping dimension, or the prehen-sion dimension, by which knowledge can be grasped throughApprehension (the Concrete Experience extreme) or by Compre-hension (the Abstract Conceptualization extreme), or by a mix of 284 Journal of Engineering Education July 2009Figure 1. Kolb’s Experiential Learning Model. Four stages of learning construction CE, RO, AC, and AE leading to two phasesby which knowledge is constructed, the Prehension Dimension(CE&AC), and the Transformation Dimension (RO&AE).  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
both. The horizontal axis represents the knowledge transformation or knowledge construction dimension. The construction can bedone via Intention (the Reflective Observation extreme), or via Ex-tension (Active Experimentation). Previous to this hypothesis, au- thors have not distinguished between grasping and transformation,combining them in one axis. Kolb’s model distinguishes apprehen- sionand comprehension as independent modes of grasping knowl- edge and intention and extension as independent modes of trans- forming experience. Furthermore he states that the four modes areequally important in contributing to the learning process, which isin disagreement with Piaget’s (1978) opinion that comprehensionand intention are superior processes. In a thoughtful look at the cur-rent traditional teaching methods in higher education, especially inEurope, one can easily realize that in many cases Piaget’s model ofcomprehension-intention superiority is followed. These “tradi-tional” teaching methods emphasize theory taught in classical class- room settings and reflection on this theory by written exams. Incontrast, Kolb’s experiential learning theory has strong implicationfor allowing balanced room for each mode, apprehension, compre-hension, intention, and extension in the learning process. Hybridcombination of these elementary modes in the learning processproduces higher level of learning.  During the laboratory session, students are mainly involved in the “Active Experimentation” stage of Kolb’s cycle, because the em-phasis is on doing the experiment. However, learning somethingfrom the experiment, or in other words, the transformation phasefor constructing new knowledge through the experimentation, re- quires first the information to be grasped or depicted . In the case of close-ended laboratory sessions, the information that is grasped ismainly the experimental procedures and the theory behind the lab(AC of Kolb’s cycle).  Proposition  In light of Kolb’s experiential
and the theory behind the lab(AC of Kolb’s cycle).  Proposition  In light of Kolb’s experiential learning theory, a poor learning outcome of the laboratory session that has been frequently reportedin the literature could be related to a weak activation of the prehen-sion dimension before coming to the lab. Hence the lab sessionturns into an algorithmic following of the lab manual instead ofactively constructing meaningful knowledge out of it.  In this paper it is proposed that using the virtual lab in a prepara- tion session can lead to better activation of the prehension dimensionin Kolb’s cycle, which then yields a better activation of the transfor-mation dimension. To test this assumption, a pedagogical experi-mental procedure was designed and applied in the second yearProcess Control Laboratory for Chemical Engineering students atLoughborough University, United Kingdom. III. V IRTUAL LABORATORIES IN EDUCATION Computer simulations became an integrated part of engineer- ing education as early as the 1970s (Campbell, 1985; Gladwin,Margerison, and Walker, 1992; Gosman et al., 1977; Ingram et al.,1979; Kinzel et al., 1981; Laghari et al., 1990; Smith, 1976). Virtuallaboratories (simulated versions of the hands-on labs) present aseries of advantages, such as they are more cost-effective to imple-ment and run, are not constrained by time or space, they are safe,etc. In science and engineering education virtual labs have emergedas complementary or alternative tools of the hands-on laboratoryeducation. Raineri (2001) supplemented the hands-on laboratory on molecular biology with a simulated version available on theWeb. The main aim of the simulated lab was to provide the stu-dents with the chance of repeating the experiments many times sothat they can acquire higher level skills and techniques in datamanipulation and interpretation, which are usually very difficult todevelop in the usual three hour classical hands-on laboratorysessions. Using the simulated lab with the
in the usual three hour classical hands-on laboratorysessions. Using the simulated lab with the course for five yearsyielded a 5 percent increase in the final exam scores, and a dramaticdecrease in the number of students who either failed or passed onlywith the minimum threshold (Raineri, 2001). However, Raineristresses the importance of the hands-on lab, pointing out that thesimulated lab is rather a supplement than a replacement. Very sim-ilar conclusions were reported by Ronen and Eliahu (2000). Theyused computer simulations software to offer a supplementalversion of an electrical circuit design experiment. They found that70 percent of the students in the experimental group benefitedfrom using the simulation by enhancing their confidence and pa-tience during the hands-on sessions. The students who did notbenefit from the simulation were either those with very high con-ceptual capabilities for whom the software formed no additionalaid in the task, or those with very low understanding of the topicand who showed no interest in improving.  Spicer and Stratford (2001) performed a qualitative study on the students’ perception of replacing real field trips with simulated ones.The students showed very positive attitudes towards using the sim-ulated field trip, but opposed the replacement of the real field tripwith a simulated one. They valued using the latter as a pre- or post-instrument to be utilized before or after the real field trip. After two years of combining computer simulations with hands- on laboratory activities in life sciences, McAteer et al. (1996) con-cluded that simulations have granted the students better conceptualunderstanding; however, there is still a need for the hands-on phys-ical skills, emphasizing that both modes are important and they arenot mutually exclusive.  Lindsay (2005) studied the impact of the access mode to the labs, i.e., hands-on, remote, or simulated, on the learning outcomes.The results of the statistical analysis suggested that
or simulated, on the learning outcomes.The results of the statistical analysis suggested that each modeoffers different learning outcomes, and adopting hybrid accessmodes would enrich the learning experience of the students. Heise (2006) did a comparative study on students’ performance in a digital logic lab, which was offered in both hands-on and simu-lated versions. Heise observed that students’ motivation and interestincreased dramatically during the hands-on lab compared to whenthe simulated experiments were used only. There is general agreement that simulations cannot and should not always replace the hands-on labs; however, they can be effectiveassisting tools. Engum, Jeffries, and Fisher (2003) performed acomparative study on using a virtual catheter lab versus a realcatheter lab. The study revealed that both groups of students whoperformed the real or the virtual lab demonstrated the developmentof adequate skills; however, the students preferred performing thereal lab. Engum and his colleagues suggested that a combination ofthe two methodologies may enhance the students’ satisfaction andskills acquisition level. A. Virtual Labs in Preparation Session Laboratory preparation can be conducted in many ways. For instance, students can be asked to prepare by reading the manual July 2009 Journal of Engineering Education 285  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
and developing an experimental procedure. Alternatively the lab manual preparation can be combined with using a simulated versionof the lab (virtual lab). The lab manual plus virtual lab preparationcan result in enhanced preparation due to many reasons.  According to the dual coding theory of information cognition, the human mind perceives and stores verbal and visual informationthrough two distinct channels (Paivio, 1971). The implication oneducational processes is that incorporating visual objects with verbalinformation can lead to better learning (Slavin, 2005). The virtuallab presents a suitable tool of visualizing the experimental rig in asimplified way and for showing the experimental plots.  The VARK learning styles model suggests that there are four main learning styles: visual, aural, read/write, and kinesthetic(VARK, 2008). Preparing from the lab manual could be suitable forthose students who have strong read/write learning styles; however,combining the virtual lab with the lab manual in the preparation ac-commodates the students who have visual and kinesthetic learningstyles, since the virtual lab is visualizing the experiment (visual style)and gives the students a chance of doing the experiment virtually(kinesthetic). The learning pyramid model (Weenk, 1999) suggeststhat information retention rates are different depending on thelearning method (5 percent lecture, 10 percent reading, 20 percentaudio/visual, 30 percent demonstration, 50 percent discussiongroup, 75 percent practice by doing, 90 percent teaching others).Virtual lab provides a chance for doing the experiment and henceresulting in a much higher knowledge retention rate than using thelab manual alone.  One key shortcoming of the classical hands-on laboratory teach- ing is the poor conceptual learning outcome due to time constraints,lack of repetitions, and the high cognitive load (Hofestein andLunetta, 2004; Johnstone and Al-Shuaili, 2001; Kirschner, 1988;Ma and Nickerson, 2006, Roth, 1994). In
2004; Johnstone and Al-Shuaili, 2001; Kirschner, 1988;Ma and Nickerson, 2006, Roth, 1994). In general, supplementingthe hands-on labs with a virtual version has been found useful, butin most cases, students do not believe that the virtual lab can be analternative to hands-on labs (Engum, Jeffries, and Fisher, 2003;McAteer et al., 1996; Raineri, 2001; Ronen and Eliahu, 2000;Spicer, 2001). Offering the students a pre-lab session for whichthey prepare using the lab manual and the virtual lab may assist inovercoming some shortcomings of the hands-on labs (Gillet et al., 2005; Gurkan, Mickelson, and Benhaddou, 2008). Additionally,the use of the virtual labs provides an ideal framework for inducingreflections during the preparation session. According to Kolb’smodel, these reflected the conceptualization and learning alreadypresent during the preparation for the lab. IV. C ASESTUDY : PROCESS CONTROL LABORATORY The Process Control Laboratory is part of the second year Instru- mentation, Control, and Industrial Practice module at the ChemicalEngineering Department at Loughborough University, UK. Theexperimental rig for the hands-on process control lab was designedusing a surge tank system. Figure 2 shows a generic schematicdiagram of the hands-on experimental rigs. The laboratory is a com-pulsory part of the module designed for undergraduate engineeringmaster’s (MEng), bachelor’s (BEng), and bachelor’s of science(BSc) programmes in Chemical Engineering at LoughboroughUniversity. The lab aims to introduce students to the principles ofcontrol engineering, such as the main components and instrumentsof a feedback loop, the concepts of open-loop control, feedbackcontrol, proportional-integral-derivative (PID) control, and PIDcontroller tuning.  The hands-on laboratory consists of two sessions, 3 hours each in duration. The sessions are scheduled for two consecutive weeks.In the first week the students are introduced to the elements oftypical feedback loops such as sensors,
first week the students are introduced to the elements oftypical feedback loops such as sensors, actuators, controllers, andprocesses. The main objectives of the first session are: (i) calibra-tion of the level sensor and (ii) calibration, hysteresis detection,installed characteristics, and relative resistance of the controlvalve. During the second week, students are introduced to control engineering concepts, the main objectives being: (i) to develop anappreciation of automatic control vs. manual control; (ii) to obtain aqualitative grasp of the differences among, proportional controller(P), proportional-integral controller (PI), and proportional-integral-derivative controller (PID); (iii) to develop rules for control 286 Journal of Engineering Education July 2009Figure 2. Schematic of the Process Control Lab Test Rig. The lab was designed to mimic an industrial plant. It aims to introduc e students to the basic elements of instrumentation and control, and to develop qualitative skills of tuning PID controllers.  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
structure selection based on the observed qualitative information; and (iv) to perform automatic controller tuning. A virtual version of the lab has been developed using National Instrument’s software environment, LabVIEW, and it was madeavailable to students for download. A sample snapshot of the opera-tor interface is presented in Figure 3. The Process Control VirtualLaboratory allows students to perform all experiments in a simula-tion mode using an interface identical to the real operator interfacein the laboratory. A remotely operated version of the lab was also developed and used in the classroom to illustrate the theoretical concepts on real-life experiments. Both virtual and remote operation modes of thelab were integrated in one software package. The software also pro-vides real-time video transmission for creating the feeling of “telep-resence” when remote lab is in operation. Software and hardwarewere based on National Instrument LabVIEW (version 8.0) andNI USB-6000 series USB data acquisition (DAQ) device. Thesoftware interface is shown in Figure 3, and it is available for down-load at http://www.ilough-lab.com. The aim of developing virtual and remote modes of the process control lab was to enrich the laboratory education by offering differ-ent access modes that enable maximum utilization of the processcontrol lab during the module. For instance, the virtual lab offersthe students an ideal way of practicing the laboratory procedure be-fore coming to the hands-on session, while the remote lab enablesthe teacher to broadcast the lab operation live in the classroom forstimulating the students or for explaining the application of theoryin practice. Remote access to the hands-on laboratory also enablesinterested students to do further inquiry related to the hands-on ex- periment from home or anywhere with an internet connection.Such remote connections may eliminate many logistical problemsassociated with conducting hands-on experiments in the universitylab,
many logistical problemsassociated with conducting hands-on experiments in the universitylab, such as specific lab opening hours, or safety and supervisionproblems related to the students being physically present in the lab. V. M ETHODOLOGY FOR PEDAGOGICAL EFFECTIVENESS MEASUREMENT A. Selection of the Control and Experimental Groups There were about 70 students registered for the class. In the laboratory, six experimental rigs were used, with students workingin groups of 2 or 3. Students were divided into four session groups,each of which consisted of 16–18 students. Each group used the rigfor two consecutive weeks to complete the experiments. The labteaching spread over 8 weeks from the academic week 2 until theacademic week 9 in the autumn semester of the 2007–2008 acade-mic year. In week one an introductory lecture was organized in aclassroom to all students where the experiment was described. Inthis session the laboratory was “brought into the classroom” byusing the remote laboratory mode aiming to stimulate the students’interest in the lab. A pre-lab preparation session was also organizedfor part of the groups, during which students came to the computerroom and worked on the virtual laboratory software following theprocedure from the lab manual while working under minimalsupervision. These pre-lab sessions (treatment) were applied to July 2009 Journal of Engineering Education 287Figure 3. The Process Control Lab Virtual and Remote Version Interface. The GUI was designed to mimic the hands-on lab when wor k- ing in the simulation mode. In case of proximal connection, the GUI provides an interface for data acquisition, instruments man ipulation, and PID control tuning. In cases of remote connection, it provides video transmission of the rig.  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions
by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
288 Journal of Engineering Education July 2009Groups 3 (G3) and 4 (G4), whereas Groups 1 (G1) and 2 (G2) had no treatment.  To guarantee equivalence as much as possible among the four groups, students were distributed evenly based on their percentageaverage in the previous academic year (the averages of the groupswere, G1 /H1100564.2 percent, G2 /H1100563.6 percent, G3 /H1100563.1 percent, and G4 /H1100563.7 percent). In the British educational system, per- centage averages are used in the final evaluations and the assign-ment of grades (A, B, etc) is subjective. The convention used in theChemical Engineering Department at Loughborough Universityis generally to use the grade A for an average above 70 percent, Bfor an average between 60 percent and 70 percent, C for averagebetween 50 percent and 60 percent, etc. Exams are usually de-signed with the aim to have an overall average between 60 percentand 70 percent, hence the groups represent average levels. Thegroups G1 and G2 represented the control group , whereas G3 and G4 were the experimental group . B. Logistical and Ethical Issues in the Experimental Design Logistical and ethical aspects of the experimental design are important to analyze to understand the experimental data. To makethe pre-lab preparatory sessions compulsory, would require changesin the course structure requiring approval by the departmental anduniversity teaching committees, and can violate generic recommen-dations related to the number of contact hours within a module.The extra hours required for the preparatory session would be possi-ble only by reducing the number of lectures or problem classes. Notmaking the virtual laboratory software available to the control groupwould have raised ethical issues related to the discrimination inusing teaching aids for parts of the class. Partially this was also thereason why minimal supervision and help was offered in thepreparatory session. To overcome the logistical and ethical con-straints, the
was offered in thepreparatory session. To overcome the logistical and ethical con-straints, the experiments were designed so that no pre-lab prepara-tory sessions were scheduled for groups G1 and G2. However, theywere asked to prepare for the lab. The intention in the experimentswas that the control group would prepare by reading the manualand the experimental group by using the virtual lab and the manual.However to eliminate ethical issues, the lab manual and the virtuallab software were made available for students to download and usein their preparation. In the questionnaires, students from the con-trol group had to answer the questions whether and how long theyprepared from the manual and this data was used in the evaluation.Non-compulsory pre-lab sessions were scheduled for the G3 andG4 students. These were time-tabled internally trying to eliminateconflicts with the students’ other duties as much as possible.  About 8–10 students of each G3 and G4 responded to the request of attending the preparation session each time, forming theexperimental group. The average mark of the experimental groupwas 66.7 percent. Students from Groups 1 and 2 formed the controlgroup with a group average of 63.8 percent (only 2.9 percent lessthan for the experimental group). Figure 4 illustrates the methodology used for the pedagogical experiment, with X representing the equivalent groups (control andexperimental before treatment) and Y and Yt represents the resultsfrom the control and the experimental groups after treatment,respectively.  For the evaluation of the statistically significant difference be- tween the control and the experimental group (if any) in response tothe treatment the null hypothesis was used (Conover, 1998). Thenull hypothesis in this case states that, “There is no statistically significant difference in the learning outcomes between the controlgroup and the experimental group due to using the virtual lab in apre-lab preparation session.” The Mann-Whitney
experimental group due to using the virtual lab in apre-lab preparation session.” The Mann-Whitney non-parametric test (Conover, 1998) was used for accepting or rejecting the null hypothesis. According tothis approach the null hypothesis is rejected (meaning that therewas a statistically significant difference between the data) if thesignificance value ( /H9268) of the test is less than 0.05. C. Verification Stages  for the Proposition The verification was divided into two main parts: (1) verifying that the virtual lab can lead to enhanced activation of the prehen-sion dimension, and (2) verifying that this leads to better activationof the knowledge transformation dimension. For the prehension dimension activation verification, a pre-lab test was designed and was conducted just before starting the hands-on session. The pre-lab tests were given to students in both weeks 1and 2. The questions from a sample pre-lab test used in week 1 aregiven in the Appendix. The statistically significant differencesbetween the answers of the students from the control and the ex-perimental groups would indicate that a pre-lab session with virtuallab played a role in grasping information needed for the hands-onlaboratory session. D. Analysis of Knowledge Grasping Questions Q1 and Q2 of the Week 1 pre-lab test were strongly related to the hands-on laboratory session. In these questions, stu-dents were asked to develop an experimental procedure that theywill follow for calibrating and deriving the characteristics of the levelsensor of the tank and the control valve that controls the outflowrate of the tank, respectively. Questions Q3–Q7 were mainlydesigned to test relevant general knowledge of the students thatthey may have gathered through the lectures, from the remote labdemonstrations that were conducted in the classroom, or by readingthe lab manual. The results of the evaluation of the pre-lab test areshown in Table 1. Using the Mann-Whitney test, the exact signifi-cance value of Q1
pre-lab test areshown in Table 1. Using the Mann-Whitney test, the exact signifi-cance value of Q1 and Q2 were smaller than 0.05 indicating thatthe null hypothesis can be rejected, hence there is indeed strong Figure 4. Conceptual model of the pedagogical experimentation methodology. The control group had no treatment, while theexperimental group was exposed to a preparation session with the virtual laboratory.  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
statistical evidence that exposing the students to a preparatory ses- sion using the virtual laboratory has led them to an overall enhancedgrasp of the procedural tasks needed for performing the lab. Thisdemonstrates that a better activation of the prehension dimensionhas occurred due to the virtual lab preparatory session. The lowermean of the control group students is related to the fact that thosestudents never or poorly prepared for the lab (all students wereasked to prepare for the lab; the software and the lab manual wereavailable to download from the Web). Poorer results were shownwhen students had read only the manual and did not experience theprocedure with the virtual lab. The difference between the controland the experimental groups is less significant ( /H9268/H11005 0.116 /H110220.05) for the questions Q3 to Q7 though the average mean is still higherfor the experimental group.  The level sensor calibration procedure was relatively easier than the procedure for the control valve calibration. This may explain thehigher mean of Q1 compared to Q2. The pre-lab test of Week IIrevealed a similar outcome where the mean of the experimentalgroup was higher for the control group. The statistical significancewas smaller than the threshold of 0.05 ( /H9268/H11005 0.041) allowing to reject the null hypothesis. This shows that students of the experi-mental group have better activation of the prehension dimension ofKolb’s cycle because they could grasp knowledge needed for thehands-on lab operation via the virtual lab that was used in a pre-labsession. E. Analysis of the Knowledge Transformation To verify that better activation of the prehension dimension would lead to better knowledge transformation into mental models(Kolb, 1984) after the hands-on lab session, post-lab tests were con-ducted directly after the students had finished their experiments. Table 2 shows the results of the analysis of the post-lab test. In question Q1 of the Week 1 post-lab test, students
results of the analysis of the post-lab test. In question Q1 of the Week 1 post-lab test, students were asked tocreate a qualitative plot of the level sensor characteristic curve basedon their observations and the data they had collected during the ex-periment. The level sensor characteristic is represented by a simplelinear curve with no hysteresis. The students’ answers were ratherclose for both the experimental and the control groups. The exactsignificance value for Q1 was 0.302 which is larger than the thresh-old of 0.05 indicating that there is no statistically significant differ-ence between the control and the experimental groups. In questionQ2, students were asked to plot the control valve characteristic,which is nonlinear and shows hysteresis. A significantly larger por-tion (more than double) of the experimental group students coulddistinguish these features (which required a higher ability of in-depth analysis) whereas fewer of the control group students coulddiscover the hysteresis. The statistical significance value of Q2 is0.025. This value is smaller than the threshold of 0.05 indicating a high probability (97.5 percent) that the higher score is not bychance, hence the null hypothesis can be rejected. For the otherquestions (Q3–Q6, Q9 and Q10), which are rather general, stu-dents from the control and the experimental group showed closeoutcome.  Questions 7 and 8 were purely conceptual, testing the students’ understanding of open and closed loop systems. Students from theexperimental group performed much better overall in these ques-tions than students from the control group (see Table 2). It deservesmentioning that the simulation of the control valve in the virtual labis not identical to the real behavior of the physical control valve inthe test rig. The simulated control valve has linear characteristicsand no hysteresis, hence these features were not observed by the ex-perimental group students in the preparation session. Nevertheless,they showed
observed by the ex-perimental group students in the preparation session. Nevertheless,they showed higher ability of detecting these features than studentsfrom the control group. The statistical test of the in-depth questionof Week 2 post-lab test also revealed acceptable significance forrejecting the null hypothesis (exact significance was 0.013 /H110210.05). These results provide evidence that students who had better activation of the prehension dimension prior to the lab session hadmore in depth learning during the hands-on lab session. In otherwords, the transformation of knowledge through the lab experienceinto mental models (Kolb, 1984) has been more successful for stu-dents who worked on improving their prehension dimension. Thisalso indicates that constructivist higher order learning in the hands-on lab session can be improved by more activation of the otherstages of the Kolb’s experiential learning cycle.  A different behavior was also observed during the laboratory sessions in the case of the experimental group students compared tothe control group students. The former showed more interest in thehands-on lab session and insisted more on answering the pre- andpost-lab tests compared to the control group students. Groups wereinformed that the pre- and post-lab tests were voluntary and werenot included in the lab or the course final marks. Kolb’s experiential learning theory offers educators a pedagogical framework for designing their courses and contextualizing specific July 2009 Journal of Engineering Education 289Table 2. Post-lab test results of week 1 (number of samples (Experimental/Control) was 18/32). Table 1. Pre-lab test results of week 1. Number of samples (Experimental/Control) was 18/30.  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on
See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
290 Journal of Engineering Education July 2009activities that lead to enhanced learning outcomes. The design can be on a large scale, such as a whole degree design, or on a smallerscale, such as the design of learning objects or a laboratory curricu-lum. Kolb suggests that optimal learning happens through transfor-mation of knowledge into mental models. The transformation isdone through reflective observation (RO) and active experimenta-tion (AE). However, a necessary condition for such transformation(or construction) of knowledge is that this knowledge should begrasped first. Knowledge depiction occurs via Concrete Experience(CE) or Abstract Conceptualization (AC). A reasonable balanceamong the four stages leads to optimal learning outcomes accordingto Kolb. In classical laboratories, the AE is the main active stage,which may give an explanation of poor learning outcomes duringthe laboratory learning phase and lead to propose additional labora-tory activities that would enhance the other learning stages in Kolb’scycle. In the next section different laboratory activities and theircontributions to Kolb’s learning stages are discussed and a novelmodel for conducting laboratory education is proposed in theframework of the pedagogical experiential learning theory. VI. A NIMPLEMENT ATION PROPOSAL OF KOLB ’S CYCLE FOR LABORATORY EDUCATION During the introductory lecture of the Instrumentation and Con- trol module, students were introduced to the lab using a PowerPointpresentation and the lab was operated remotely in the classroomwith the aim of providing a realistic feeling (telepresence) to studentsand stimulating them towards conducting the lab. This lecturestructure is in correlation with the Concrete Experience stage of theKolb’s cycle. At the end of the semester in the module question-naires, students were asked whether this stimulated their interest inthe lab. A significant portion, 80.6 percent, of the students answered“Yes”. One of the lectures was devoted to PID
portion, 80.6 percent, of the students answered“Yes”. One of the lectures was devoted to PID control. In this lecture the theoretical background of the PID control approach was ex-plained and the main features of the control algorithm were illus-trated by using the remote lab in the classroom. Again, a significantportion of students, 78.1 percent, found this combination useful inunderstanding the theory which enhanced the Abstract Conceptu- alization part of the Kolb’s cycle.  Well designed pre-lab test questions or preparatory sessions with the virtual laboratory will help students in contextualizing the labo-ratory objectives and assist in realizing the Concrete Experiencestage. The use of the virtual lab and the design of reflective questionsfacilitate reflection, enhancing the Reflective Observation stage.  Well designed post-lab test questions give the students a chance to reflect over their experience in the lab session. These questionsmust be designed to help with the implementation of a meaningfulmodel of the knowledge in their memory based on the lab sessionexperience. This also helps to enhance the Reflective Observationstage. Putting the pre- and post-lab testing in the context of labora-tory education will urge the students to prepare well which en-hances the Active Conceptualization stage.  According to Kolb, constructivist learning occurs in a cyclic spiral way. The optimal learning happens when all four phases ofthe learning cycle are activated. As the first cycle ends by transfer-ring knowledge into mental (or theoretical) model through experi-ence, a further higher order cycle can be started for constructinghigher order knowledge, and so on. Therefore, it is an importantobjective of engineering education, in particular, laboratory educa-tion, to motivate students towards higher levels of learning orexperimentation. In the last lecture of the course, we surveyed thestudents’ opinion about the lab. One of the questions on the ques-tionnaire was:
we surveyed thestudents’ opinion about the lab. One of the questions on the ques-tionnaire was: “Would you like the idea of conducting post-lab realexperimentation through the Internet (i.e., from your home PC)after the lab for enhancing your report or testing further ideas?” Thepossible answers were on a scale from 1 (not at all) to 6 (very much).The responses of the two groups differed considerably. The averageof the control group is 4.19/6 while the average of the experimentalgroup is 5.27/6. The Mann-Whitney non parametric test gives theexact significant value of 0.027, which is smaller than 0.05 hencethe null hypothesis can be rejected. Figure 5 shows the students’answer distributions. This demonstrates again that an enhancedactivation of the prehension dimension of Kolb’s cycle has a statisti-cally significant impact on motivating students towards furtherinquiry and experimentation; therefore providing a better construc-tivist experience for laboratory education.  Figure 5. Experimental group students willingness of conducting further experimentation after the hands-on lab session (“1” /H11549not at all, “6” /H11549very much).  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Remotely operated labs offer the chance to interested students for flexible further investigation and experimentation, i.e., they offer thepossibility of higher order learning. This additional activity may in-volve additional theory investigation (Abstract Conceptualization),Active Experimentation, and Reflective Observation. Remote labsoffer the students a chance to repeat the experiment and have furtherreflection of their hands-on session (Reflective Observation).  The virtual lab also offers a similar opportunity; however, the fundamental difference between the virtual lab and the hands-onor remote lab is the belief factor. The question related to the stu- dents’ opinion about replacing the hands-on lab with the virtual labresulted in 91.2 percent of the students rejecting this idea.  In the laboratory session, students are mainly immersed in the Active Experimentation stage of Kolb’s cycle. Poor outcome oflaboratory education can be correlated with the poor balance of theother stages of Kolb’s experiential learning cycle, since little atten-tion is normally paid to laboratory activities that can lead to con-structivist learning during the hands-on session. The results of thepedagogical experimentation shown in this paper indicate thatmodifications can be introduced to the teaching methodology according to which classical hands-on laboratories are taught.These modifications, with the aim to enhance constructivist learn-ing, are suggested in the context of Kolb’s experiential learning cycleand are implemented using recent advances in information andcommunication technologies. The mapping of the different ele-ments of the laboratory education system to Kolb’s cycle is proposedin Table 3. Figure 6 shows a conceptual model of the constructivistlaboratory based on Kolb’s experiential learning cycle. VII. C ONCLUSIONS In this paper, the learning outcomes of the laboratory session are corroborated in the context of the well known pedagogical theory,Kolb’s experiential
session are corroborated in the context of the well known pedagogical theory,Kolb’s experiential learning cycle. A proposition is introduced thatconsiders that the often poor learning outcome of the laboratorysession is mainly due to weak activation of the prehension dimensionof the learning cycle, before coming to the lab. The pedagogical ex-periments based on combined application of pre- and post-lab testsand the three dimensional laboratory (application of the combina-tion of hands-on, virtual, and remote experiments) have providedstatistical evidence of the proposition. In particular, introducing thevirtual lab in the pre-lab preparation session has lead to considerableimprovement in the conceptual understanding of the students dur-ing the hands-on lab session. It also helped to reduce the cognitiveload of students. The results demonstrate that designing engineer-ing laboratory education based on well-developed pedagogical the-ory can lead to better learning outcomes. Based on the pedagogicalexperiments, a novel model of laboratory education was introducedthat has its pedagogical background in the experiential learningtheory of Kolb. An algorithm of implementing Kolb’s cycle utiliz-ing virtual and remote modes of the hands-on lab, as well as, byintroducing additional lab activities has been proposed.  ACKNOWLEDGMENT Partial financial support by the Engineering Center of Excellence in Teaching and Learning (engCETL), Loughborough University,UK, and by The Higher Education Academy, Engineering SubjectCentre, UK, mini-project are gratefully acknowledged.  July 2009 Journal of Engineering Education 291Table 3. Kolb’s cycle mapping for laboratory education. Figure 6. Abdulwahed-Nagy Constructivist Laboratory Education Model, based on Kolb’s theory. The extra activitiesfacilitate higher order learning. CE, RO, AC, and AE correspondto the following Kolb’s model stages: Concrete Experience, ReflectiveObservation, Abstract Conceptualization, Active Experimentation.
Concrete Experience, ReflectiveObservation, Abstract Conceptualization, Active Experimentation.  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
292 Journal of Engineering Education July 2009REFERENCES Ausubel, D.P., and D. Fitzgerald. 1962. Organizer, General back- ground, and antecedent learning variables in sequential verbal-learning.Journal of Educational Psychology 53 (6): 243–49. Bender, B. 2001. Concepts for purposive and motivational teaching and learning in engineering design courses. International Journal of Engi- neering Education 17(4–5): 336–41. Campbell, D.R. 1985. Interactive graphics software for an undergraduate course in digital signal processing. Computers & Education 9 (2): 79–86. Conover, W.J. 1998. Practical nonparametric statistics . 3rd ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley. David, A., P.E. Wyrick, and L. Hilsen. 2002. Using Kolb’s Cycle to round out learning. In Proceedings of the 2002 American Society for Engineer- ing Education Annual Conference . Montréal, Quebec, Canada. Engum, S.A., P. Jeffries, and L. Fisher, 2003. Intravenous catheter training system: Computer-based education versus traditional learningmethods. The American Journal of Surgery 186 (1): 67–74. Feisel, L.D., and G.D. Peterson. 2002. A colloquy on learning objec- tives for engineering education laboratories. In Proceedings of ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition: Vive L’ingenieur! Montréal, Quebec, Canada. Feisel, L.D., and A.J. Rosa. 2005. The role of the laboratory in under- graduate engineering education. Journal of Engineering Education 94 (1): 121–30.  Felder, R., D. Woods, J. Stice, and A. Rugarcia. 2000. The future of engineering education: II. Teaching methods that work. Chemical Engi- neering Education 34 (1): 26–39. Gary, L., and J.A. Kinzel. 1981. The impact of computer graphics on mechanical engineering education at The Ohio State University. Computers & Education 5 (4): 275–87. Gillet, D, A.V. Nguyen Ngoc, and Y. Rekik. 2005. Collaborative web- based experimentation in flexible engineering education. IEEE Transac- tions on Education 48 (4): 696–704. Gladwin, R.P., D. Margerison, and S.M. Walker. 1992.
Transac- tions on Education 48 (4): 696–704. Gladwin, R.P., D. Margerison, and S.M. Walker. 1992. Computer-as- sisted learning in chemistry. Computers & Education 19 (1–2): 17–25. Gosman, A.D., B.E. Launder, F.C. Lockwood, and G.J. Reece. 1977. Computer assisted teaching of fluid mechanics and heat transfer. Comput- ers & Education 1 (3): 131–39. Gunstone, R.F. 1991. Reconstructing theory from practical experi- ence. In Practical science , ed. B. Woolnough, 67–77. Milton Keynes: Open University Press. Gurkan, D., A. Mickelson, and D. Benhaddou. 2008. Remote labora- tories for optical circuits. IEEE Transactions on Education 51 (1): 53–60.  Heise, D. 2006. Asserting the inherent benefits of hands-on laboratory projects vs. computer simulations. Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges 21 (4): 104–10. Hofstein, A., and Lunetta, V.N. 1982. The role of the laboratory in science teaching: neglected aspects of research. Review of Educational Re- search 52(2): 201–217. Hofstein, A., and V.N. Lunetta. 2004. The laboratory in science edu- cation: Foundations for the twenty-first century. Science Education 88 (1): 28–54. Ingram, D., C.J. Dickinson, L. Saunders, M. Sherriff, R. Bloch, G. Sweeney, and K. Ahmed. 1979. Application of a pharmacokinetic simu-lation program in pharmacy courses. Computers & Education 3 (4): 335–45. Johnstone, A.H., and A. Al-Shuaili. 2001. Learning in the laboratory; some thoughts from the literature. University Chemistry Education 5: 42–51.Kamis, A., and H. Topi. 2007. Network subnetting: An instance of technical problem solving in Kolb’s experiential learning cycle. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences . Waikoloa, HI. Kirschner, P.A. 1988. The laboratory in higher science education, problems, premises, and objectives.  Higher Education 17 (1): 81–90. Kolb, D.A. 1984. Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Laghari, J.R., J.L.
as the source of learning and development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Laghari, J.R., J.L. Suthar, and S. Cygan. 1990. PSPICE applications in high voltage engineering education. Computers & Education 14 (6): 455–62. Lagoudas, D.C., J.D. Whitcomb, D.A. Miller, M.Z. Lagoudas, and K.J. Shryock. 2000. Continuum mechanics in a restructured engineeringundergraduate curriculum. International Journal of Engineering Education 16 (4): 301–14. Lindsay, E.D., and M.C. Good. 2005. Effects of laboratory access modes upon learning outcomes. IEEE Transactions on Education 48 (4): 619–31. Ma, J., and J.V. Nickerson. 2006. Hands-on, simulated, and remote laboratories: A comparative literature review. ACM Computing Surveys 38 (3): 1–24. McAteer, E., D. Neil, N. Barr, M. Brown, S. Draper, and F. Henderson. 1996. Simulation software in a life sciences practical laboratory. Computers & Education 26 (1–3): 101–12. Moor, S., and P. Piergiovanni. 2003. Experiments in the classroom, ex- amples of inductive learning with classroom-friendly laboratory kits. InProceedings of the 2003 American Society for Engineering Education AnnualConference and Exposition . Nashville, TN. Piaget, J. 1978. The development of thought: Equilibration of cognitive structures . Oxford, England: Blackwell.  Plett, G.L., R.E. Ziemer, M.D. Ciletti, R. Dandapani, T. Kalkur, and M.A. Wickert. 2006. Experiences in updating the ECE curriculum withsignal processing first and Kolb/4MAT pedagogy. In Proceedings of the 2006 American Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference andExposition . Chicago, IL. Raineri, D. 2001. Virtual laboratories enhance traditional undergradu- ate biology laboratories. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 29 (4): 160–62. Ronen, M., and M. Eliahu. 2000. Simulation—a bridge between the- ory and reality: The case of electric circuits. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 16 (1): 14–26. Roth, W.M. 1994. Experimenting in a constructivist high school physics laboratory.
16 (1): 14–26. Roth, W.M. 1994. Experimenting in a constructivist high school physics laboratory. Journal of Research in Science Teaching 31 (2): 197–223. Slavin, R.E. 2005. Educational psychology . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. Smith, P.R. 1976. Computers in engineering education in the United Kingdom. Computers & Education 1 (1): 13–21. Spicer, J.I., and J. Stratford. 2001. Student perceptions of a virtual field trip to replace a real field trip. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 17 (4): 345–54. Stice, J.E. 1987. Using KoIb’s learning cycle to improve student learn- ing. Engineering Education 77 (5): 291–96. VARK. 2008. http://www.vark-learn.com/english/index.asp (last accessed October 2008). Wankat, P.C. 2004. Analysis of the first ten years of the Journal of Engineering Education . Journal of Engineering Education 93 (1): 13–21.  Weenk, G.W.H. 1999. Learning pyramid . The Netherlands: University of Twente.  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
AUTHORS ’ BIOGRAPHIES Mahmoud Abdulwahed’s main research interest is in the integration of IT and Cybernetics into social sciences. He iscurrently pursuing a Ph.D. degree at the Engineering Centerof Excellence in Teaching and Learning and the ChemicalEngineering Department, Loughborough University, UnitedKingdom.  Address: engCETL, Keith Green Building, Loughborough Uni- versity, Loughborough LE11 3TU; telephone: ( /H110011) 44.1509. 227189; fax: ( /H110011) 44.1509.227181; e-mail: m.abdulwahed@ lboro.ac.uk.Zoltan K Nagy is senior lecturer in the Chemical Engineering Department, Loughborough University since 2005. Prior to hiscurrent position Z.K. Nagy has held teaching and research posi-tions at the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, USA,University of Stuttgart, Germany, ETH, Zurich, Switzerland,University of Heidelberg, Germany, and the “Babes-Bolyai” Uni-versity of Cluj, Romania. Dr. Nagy is the recipient of the 2007Royal Academy of Engineering and ExxonMobile Excellence inTeaching Award.  Address: Chemical Engineering Department, Loughborough Uni- versity, Loughborough LE11 3TU, UK; telephone: ( /H1100144) 1509.222516; fax: ( /H1100144) 1509.223923; e-mail: z.k.nagy@lboro.ac.uk.  July 2009 Journal of Engineering Education 293  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
294 Journal of Engineering Education July 2009APPENDIX Questions from the Pre-lab quizzes for week I, Rigs 1-6:  1. Describe briefly in the space provided below the key steps of the experimental procedure you plan to followfor the sensor calibration: 2. Describe briefly in the space provided below the key steps of the experimental procedure you plan to followfor the control valve calibration: 3. Define a sensor? Do we use sensors in the process? If yes, which are these? 4. Define an actuator? Do we use any actuators in the process? If yes which are these? 5. What is the functionality of the control valve in the process? 6. What do we use for measuring the inlet flow rate?7. What do we use for measuring the outlet flow rate? Questions from the Post-Lab quiz for week I, Rigs 1-6:  1. Analyze briefly your data obtained for the level sensor cali- bration. Sketch the level sensor characteristics. 2. Analyze briefly your data obtained for the control valve calibration and sketch the control valve characteristics. 3. Define the zeroof a sensor. What was the zero value of the level sensor obtained based on your experiments? 4. Provide a brief definition of the term controller .  5. What is the controller when the process is set to the man- ual mode?  6. What is the controller when the process is set to the auto- matic mode? 7. Is the following an open or closed system? Explain your answer clearly.8. Is the following an open or closed system? Explain your answer clearly. 9. Is there anything wrong in the following diagram? If yes, make the necessary corrections on the figurebelow.  10. Based on your answer in the previous question, please place the following signals in the correct places.a. Controller outputb. Disturbancec. Process outputd. Controller inpute. Process input f. Desired output value   21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the
by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
July 2009 Journal of Engineering Education 283Applying Kolb’s Experiential Learning Cycle for Laboratory Education MAHMOUD ABDULWAHED Engineering Center of Excellence in Teaching and Learning Loughborough University ZOLTAN K N AGY Chemical Engineering DepartmentLoughborough University  ABSTRACT This paper describes a model for laboratory education based onKolb’s experiential learning theory. The method is implementedusing modern teaching technologies and a combination of remote,virtual, and hands-on laboratory sessions and have been applied tothe teaching of the undergraduate process control laboratory at theChemical Engineering Department at Loughborough University,United Kingdom. An argument that poor learning in the labora-tory is due to insufficient activation of the prehension dimensionof Kolb’s cycle was suggested and verified, providing a pedagogicalexplanation. The quantitative analysis showed significantenhancement of the learning outcomes of the experimental groupcompared with the control group. Apart from the hands-onsession, the proposed model involves additional activities, such aspre- and post-lab tests and virtual laboratory sessions, which areassociated with Kolb’s cycle to facilitate constructivist learning.The paper provides the first laboratory education model thatbuilds thoroughly on Kolb’s experiential learning theory. Keywords: Kolb’s experiential learning, laboratory engineering education, remote and virtual laboratories I. INTRODUCTION The importance of laboratory experience in engineering educa- tion curricula has been emphasized in a large number of science andengineering education articles (Feisel, 2005; Hofstein and Lunetta,2004; Johnstone and Al-Shuaili, 2001; Kirschner, 1988; Ma andNickerson, 2006). The essential role of laboratories can be correlatedwith the fact that engineering is, in general, an applied science thatrequires hands-on skills and involves elements of design, problemsolving, and analytical thinking. Well designed
skills and involves elements of design, problemsolving, and analytical thinking. Well designed laboratories duringundergraduate engineering degrees may well improve these skills ofthe future engineers.  Engineering had been taught as a primarily hands-on subject up to the 18th century. However, engineering education has benefitedfrom the advances in science and it began to embed deeper theoret-ical concepts by the end of the 19th century, especially in the U.S.schools initially (Feisel, 2005). Since then, the pedagogical emphasis in engineering education has been shifted more towards classroomand lecture-based education, and in many schools, less attentionhas been given to the laboratory education, particularly during thelast 30 years (Hofstein and Lunetta, 1982; Hofstein and Lunetta,2004; Feisel and Peterson, 2002). Wankat (2004) observed thatonly 6 percent of the articles published in the Journal of Engineering Education from 1993–2002 had “laboratory” as a keyword. Labora- tory pedagogy has been recently reported to be a fertile arena ofresearch for the coming years (Feisel and Rosa, 2005; Hofsteinand Lunetta, 2004), especially in the context of the increasing needto make more use of the new developments in information andcommunication technology (ICT) for enhancing the laboratoryeducation.  The impact of laboratory education on students’ learning is often not recognized (Roth, 1994). One reason for rethinking therole of the laboratory in engineering and science education is the re-cent shift towards constructivist pedagogy in which the importanceof knowledge gained via experience is emphasized. Furthermore,constructivist pedagogy places a larger role on student autonomy inthe learning process. This is particularly important in light of therecent increase in the needs of industry for engineering graduateswho are autonomous and equipped with good hands-on skills.Enhancing laboratory education can serve as a motivating factortoward an engineering career.  Despite
laboratory education can serve as a motivating factortoward an engineering career.  Despite the important role of laboratories in engineering educa- tion, several researchers have reported that the expected benefits oflaboratories on students’ learning are not achieved in most of thecases (Hofestein and Lunetta, 2004; Roth, 1994). In their literaturereview, Ma and Nickerson (2006) found that 100 percent of the ar-ticles concerning hands-on laboratories considered that labs shouldbe platforms for facilitating conceptual understanding, and 65 per-cent considered that laboratories should also facilitate the designskills. However, constructing knowledge is a complex processwhich is often out of the timeframe of the planned laboratory ses-sions. Knowledge construction has four main phases according toKolb’s experiential learning theory (1984), including stimulation,reflection, abstraction, and experimentation. Meaningful learningis an iterative process requiring reflection (Hofestein and Lunetta,2004). These practices are generally missing in the classical hands-on taught laboratories. Gunstone (1991) considers that laboratorieswhich are taught in the classical way can barely be considered asplatforms of knowledge construction, since students have less timeto interact and reflect while they are busy with the technical and theoperational side of the lab. Kirschner (1988) points out the mainshortcomings in some of the hands-on laboratory sessions, includ-ing that students are often required to solve problems that are moredifficult than their cognitive abilities, students are constrained withthe short time periods the labs normally offer, and teachers assume
that students will be able to overcome the problems in the assigned time (Kirschner, 1988). Kirschner also describes that classical labsare usually taught as one single demonstration due to economicaland logistical reasons; however, forming and understanding conceptsrequire repetition (Kirschener, 1988). There is a general consensusthat laboratory work generates poor learning outcomes compared tothe time, effort, and costs invested in laboratory education(Hofestein and Lunetta, 2004; Johnstone and Al-Shuaili, 2001;Kirschner, 1988; Ma and Nickerson, 2006). One possible reasonfor the poor learning outcomes is that engineering labs are very sel-dom designed based on well defined constructivist pedagogicalmodels. One of the suitable pedagogical models for engineeringeducation is Kolb’s experiential learning framework. Kolb’s experi-ential learning cycle is particularly suitable for engineering educa-tion which  is an experiential field of science (Bender, 2001; Felderet al., 2000). Based on Kolb’s theory, Moor and Piergiovanni(2003) justified the advantages of blending classroom theory withexperiments. Kamis and Topi (2007) examined three hypotheses ofpedagogical design for enhancing the problem solving in the field ofnetworks subnettings. Two of them were based on Kolb’s modelwhile the third was based on the advance organizer technique(Ausubel, 1968). Bender (2001) explained a major reform of thecourses taught at the Engineering Design department at the Tech-nical University of Berlin using Kolb’s theory and described theimportance of incorporating the four dimensions of learning in thedesign of lectures. Lagoudas et al. (2000) restructured five core un-dergraduate engineering courses using Kolb’s cycle as a pedagogicalbackground for this process. They relied on computer software andsimulations in their implementation of Kolb’s theory (Lagoudas et al.,2000). Plett et al. (2006) redesigned three engineering coursesbuilding upon Kolb theories and the 4MAT system. The
al. (2006) redesigned three engineering coursesbuilding upon Kolb theories and the 4MAT system. The trialcourse (Introduction to Robotics) was very successful and led to asuccessful NSF grant proposal for curriculum design, in which theyaim to redesign a series of systems courses based on theKolb/4MAT pedagogical model. David and Wyrick (2002) assessedthe learning styles of industrial engineering students over a ten-yearperiod and used Kolb’s experiential learning cycle as a pedagogicalbasis for designing learning experiences for the students. One keyfinding in their study was that providing balanced learning experi-ences to the students, based on the four stages of Kolb’s cycle, hadled to deeper learning and longer retention of information. Stice(1987) also implemented teaching strategies in the class that can ac-commodate all four stages of Kolb’s cycle to improve the learningprocess for undergraduate students.  A thorough literature review on engineering laboratory design, in particular in the context of incorporating new technologies suchas virtual and/or remote labs, reveals that the majority of papers aretechnically focused. This paper describes a new approach for lab-oratory education, which is underpinned by Kolb’s experientiallearning theory (Kolb, 1984). The method uses a combination ofvirtual, remote, and hands-on laboratory sessions and pre- andpost-lab tests to maximize the information retention of students byactivating the stages of Kolb’s learning cycle. The approach hasbeen used in the teaching of the second year undergraduate ProcessControl Laboratory in the Chemical Engineering Department atLoughborough University, United Kingdom. Qualitative andquantitative statistical analyses of the effectiveness of the methodare presented. It is shown that the usually poor knowledge retentionin laboratory education can be explained by the inefficient activationof the prehension dimension of Kolb’s learning cycle. A methodol- ogy is proposed based on applying a
the prehension dimension of Kolb’s learning cycle. A methodol- ogy is proposed based on applying a Virtual Laboratory environ-ment to provide a preparatory session before the hands-on laborato-ry to facilitate reflective preparation for the lab. The results showthat significant enhancement of the laboratory learning process canbe achieved by designing and applying a combination of in-classremote, virtual pre-lab, and hands-on laboratory sessions accordingto Kolb’s experiential learning model. This paper embraces the Kolb’sconstructivist model as pedagogical basis of designing enhancedlaboratory education. II. K OLB ’SEXPERIENTIAL LEARNING THEORY Kolb (1984) introduced his theory on experiential learning more than 20 years ago, which has been well accepted as an effi-cient pedagogical model of learning. Kolb’s experiential learningtheory provides clear mechanisms of teaching and learning design,which are strongly underlined with the constructivist view on theway people construct their knowledge. Kolb suggested that effec-tive learners should have four types of abilities: (1) Concrete Expe-rience ability (CE), (2) Reflective Observation ability (RO), (3)Abstract Conceptualization ability (AC), and (4) active Experi-mentation ability (AE). Hence, the optimal learning takes place when learners have ade- quate balance of these four stages during their learning experience.According to Kolb, learning requires that individuals first shoulddetect, depict, or grasp knowledge, and then a phase of constructionshould take place to complete the learning process. This construc-tion is a transformation of the grasped knowledge into a mentalmodel through experiencing this knowledge. Kolb proposed thatthe optimal learning would pass through a cycle of the ConcreteExperience, Reflective Observation, Abstract Conceptualization,and Active Experimentation. This is called Kolb’s experientiallearning cycle and is shown schematically in Figure 1. The verticalaxis represents the knowledge
cycle and is shown schematically in Figure 1. The verticalaxis represents the knowledge grasping dimension, or the prehen-sion dimension, by which knowledge can be grasped throughApprehension (the Concrete Experience extreme) or by Compre-hension (the Abstract Conceptualization extreme), or by a mix of 284 Journal of Engineering Education July 2009Figure 1. Kolb’s Experiential Learning Model. Four stages of learning construction CE, RO, AC, and AE leading to two phasesby which knowledge is constructed, the Prehension Dimension(CE&AC), and the Transformation Dimension (RO&AE).  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License --- both. The horizontal axis represents the knowledge transformation or knowledge construction dimension. The construction can bedone via Intention (the Reflective Observation extreme), or via Ex-tension (Active Experimentation). Previous to this hypothesis, au- thors have not distinguished between grasping and transformation,combining them in one axis. Kolb’s model distinguishes apprehen- sionand comprehension as independent modes of grasping knowl- edge and intention and extension as independent modes of trans- forming experience. Furthermore he states that the four modes areequally important in contributing to the learning process, which isin disagreement with Piaget’s (1978) opinion that comprehensionand intention are superior processes. In a thoughtful look at the cur-rent traditional teaching methods in higher education, especially inEurope, one can easily realize that in many cases Piaget’s model ofcomprehension-intention superiority is followed. These “tradi-tional” teaching methods emphasize theory taught in classical class- room settings and reflection on this theory by written exams. Incontrast, Kolb’s experiential learning theory has strong implicationfor allowing balanced room for each mode, apprehension, compre-hension, intention, and extension in the learning process. Hybridcombination of these elementary modes in the learning processproduces higher level of learning.  During the laboratory session, students are mainly involved in the “Active Experimentation” stage of Kolb’s cycle, because the em-phasis is on doing the experiment. However, learning somethingfrom the experiment, or in other words, the transformation phasefor constructing new knowledge through the experimentation, re- quires first the information to be grasped or depicted . In the case of close-ended laboratory sessions, the information that is grasped ismainly the experimental procedures and the theory behind the lab(AC of Kolb’s cycle).  Proposition  In light of Kolb’s experiential
and the theory behind the lab(AC of Kolb’s cycle).  Proposition  In light of Kolb’s experiential learning theory, a poor learning outcome of the laboratory session that has been frequently reportedin the literature could be related to a weak activation of the prehen-sion dimension before coming to the lab. Hence the lab sessionturns into an algorithmic following of the lab manual instead ofactively constructing meaningful knowledge out of it.  In this paper it is proposed that using the virtual lab in a prepara- tion session can lead to better activation of the prehension dimensionin Kolb’s cycle, which then yields a better activation of the transfor-mation dimension. To test this assumption, a pedagogical experi-mental procedure was designed and applied in the second yearProcess Control Laboratory for Chemical Engineering students atLoughborough University, United Kingdom. III. V IRTUAL LABORATORIES IN EDUCATION Computer simulations became an integrated part of engineer- ing education as early as the 1970s (Campbell, 1985; Gladwin,Margerison, and Walker, 1992; Gosman et al., 1977; Ingram et al.,1979; Kinzel et al., 1981; Laghari et al., 1990; Smith, 1976). Virtuallaboratories (simulated versions of the hands-on labs) present aseries of advantages, such as they are more cost-effective to imple-ment and run, are not constrained by time or space, they are safe,etc. In science and engineering education virtual labs have emergedas complementary or alternative tools of the hands-on laboratoryeducation. Raineri (2001) supplemented the hands-on laboratory on molecular biology with a simulated version available on theWeb. The main aim of the simulated lab was to provide the stu-dents with the chance of repeating the experiments many times sothat they can acquire higher level skills and techniques in datamanipulation and interpretation, which are usually very difficult todevelop in the usual three hour classical hands-on laboratorysessions. Using the simulated lab with the
in the usual three hour classical hands-on laboratorysessions. Using the simulated lab with the course for five yearsyielded a 5 percent increase in the final exam scores, and a dramaticdecrease in the number of students who either failed or passed onlywith the minimum threshold (Raineri, 2001). However, Raineristresses the importance of the hands-on lab, pointing out that thesimulated lab is rather a supplement than a replacement. Very sim-ilar conclusions were reported by Ronen and Eliahu (2000). Theyused computer simulations software to offer a supplementalversion of an electrical circuit design experiment. They found that70 percent of the students in the experimental group benefitedfrom using the simulation by enhancing their confidence and pa-tience during the hands-on sessions. The students who did notbenefit from the simulation were either those with very high con-ceptual capabilities for whom the software formed no additionalaid in the task, or those with very low understanding of the topicand who showed no interest in improving.  Spicer and Stratford (2001) performed a qualitative study on the students’ perception of replacing real field trips with simulated ones.The students showed very positive attitudes towards using the sim-ulated field trip, but opposed the replacement of the real field tripwith a simulated one. They valued using the latter as a pre- or post-instrument to be utilized before or after the real field trip. After two years of combining computer simulations with hands- on laboratory activities in life sciences, McAteer et al. (1996) con-cluded that simulations have granted the students better conceptualunderstanding; however, there is still a need for the hands-on phys-ical skills, emphasizing that both modes are important and they arenot mutually exclusive.  Lindsay (2005) studied the impact of the access mode to the labs, i.e., hands-on, remote, or simulated, on the learning outcomes.The results of the statistical analysis suggested that --- or simulated, on the learning outcomes.The results of the statistical analysis suggested that each modeoffers different learning outcomes, and adopting hybrid accessmodes would enrich the learning experience of the students. Heise (2006) did a comparative study on students’ performance in a digital logic lab, which was offered in both hands-on and simu-lated versions. Heise observed that students’ motivation and interestincreased dramatically during the hands-on lab compared to whenthe simulated experiments were used only. There is general agreement that simulations cannot and should not always replace the hands-on labs; however, they can be effectiveassisting tools. Engum, Jeffries, and Fisher (2003) performed acomparative study on using a virtual catheter lab versus a realcatheter lab. The study revealed that both groups of students whoperformed the real or the virtual lab demonstrated the developmentof adequate skills; however, the students preferred performing thereal lab. Engum and his colleagues suggested that a combination ofthe two methodologies may enhance the students’ satisfaction andskills acquisition level. A. Virtual Labs in Preparation Session Laboratory preparation can be conducted in many ways. For instance, students can be asked to prepare by reading the manual July 2009 Journal of Engineering Education 285  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
and developing an experimental procedure. Alternatively the lab manual preparation can be combined with using a simulated versionof the lab (virtual lab). The lab manual plus virtual lab preparationcan result in enhanced preparation due to many reasons.  According to the dual coding theory of information cognition, the human mind perceives and stores verbal and visual informationthrough two distinct channels (Paivio, 1971). The implication oneducational processes is that incorporating visual objects with verbalinformation can lead to better learning (Slavin, 2005). The virtuallab presents a suitable tool of visualizing the experimental rig in asimplified way and for showing the experimental plots.  The VARK learning styles model suggests that there are four main learning styles: visual, aural, read/write, and kinesthetic(VARK, 2008). Preparing from the lab manual could be suitable forthose students who have strong read/write learning styles; however,combining the virtual lab with the lab manual in the preparation ac-commodates the students who have visual and kinesthetic learningstyles, since the virtual lab is visualizing the experiment (visual style)and gives the students a chance of doing the experiment virtually(kinesthetic). The learning pyramid model (Weenk, 1999) suggeststhat information retention rates are different depending on thelearning method (5 percent lecture, 10 percent reading, 20 percentaudio/visual, 30 percent demonstration, 50 percent discussiongroup, 75 percent practice by doing, 90 percent teaching others).Virtual lab provides a chance for doing the experiment and henceresulting in a much higher knowledge retention rate than using thelab manual alone.  One key shortcoming of the classical hands-on laboratory teach- ing is the poor conceptual learning outcome due to time constraints,lack of repetitions, and the high cognitive load (Hofestein andLunetta, 2004; Johnstone and Al-Shuaili, 2001; Kirschner, 1988;Ma and Nickerson, 2006, Roth, 1994). In
2004; Johnstone and Al-Shuaili, 2001; Kirschner, 1988;Ma and Nickerson, 2006, Roth, 1994). In general, supplementingthe hands-on labs with a virtual version has been found useful, butin most cases, students do not believe that the virtual lab can be analternative to hands-on labs (Engum, Jeffries, and Fisher, 2003;McAteer et al., 1996; Raineri, 2001; Ronen and Eliahu, 2000;Spicer, 2001). Offering the students a pre-lab session for whichthey prepare using the lab manual and the virtual lab may assist inovercoming some shortcomings of the hands-on labs (Gillet et al., 2005; Gurkan, Mickelson, and Benhaddou, 2008). Additionally,the use of the virtual labs provides an ideal framework for inducingreflections during the preparation session. According to Kolb’smodel, these reflected the conceptualization and learning alreadypresent during the preparation for the lab. IV. C ASESTUDY : PROCESS CONTROL LABORATORY The Process Control Laboratory is part of the second year Instru- mentation, Control, and Industrial Practice module at the ChemicalEngineering Department at Loughborough University, UK. Theexperimental rig for the hands-on process control lab was designedusing a surge tank system. Figure 2 shows a generic schematicdiagram of the hands-on experimental rigs. The laboratory is a com-pulsory part of the module designed for undergraduate engineeringmaster’s (MEng), bachelor’s (BEng), and bachelor’s of science(BSc) programmes in Chemical Engineering at LoughboroughUniversity. The lab aims to introduce students to the principles ofcontrol engineering, such as the main components and instrumentsof a feedback loop, the concepts of open-loop control, feedbackcontrol, proportional-integral-derivative (PID) control, and PIDcontroller tuning.  The hands-on laboratory consists of two sessions, 3 hours each in duration. The sessions are scheduled for two consecutive weeks.In the first week the students are introduced to the elements oftypical feedback loops such as sensors, --- structure selection based on the observed qualitative information; and (iv) to perform automatic controller tuning. A virtual version of the lab has been developed using National Instrument’s software environment, LabVIEW, and it was madeavailable to students for download. A sample snapshot of the opera-tor interface is presented in Figure 3. The Process Control VirtualLaboratory allows students to perform all experiments in a simula-tion mode using an interface identical to the real operator interfacein the laboratory. A remotely operated version of the lab was also developed and used in the classroom to illustrate the theoretical concepts on real-life experiments. Both virtual and remote operation modes of thelab were integrated in one software package. The software also pro-vides real-time video transmission for creating the feeling of “telep-resence” when remote lab is in operation. Software and hardwarewere based on National Instrument LabVIEW (version 8.0) andNI USB-6000 series USB data acquisition (DAQ) device. Thesoftware interface is shown in Figure 3, and it is available for down-load at http://www.ilough-lab.com. The aim of developing virtual and remote modes of the process control lab was to enrich the laboratory education by offering differ-ent access modes that enable maximum utilization of the processcontrol lab during the module. For instance, the virtual lab offersthe students an ideal way of practicing the laboratory procedure be-fore coming to the hands-on session, while the remote lab enablesthe teacher to broadcast the lab operation live in the classroom forstimulating the students or for explaining the application of theoryin practice. Remote access to the hands-on laboratory also enablesinterested students to do further inquiry related to the hands-on ex- periment from home or anywhere with an internet connection.Such remote connections may eliminate many logistical problemsassociated with conducting hands-on experiments in the universitylab,
first week the students are introduced to the elements oftypical feedback loops such as sensors, actuators, controllers, andprocesses. The main objectives of the first session are: (i) calibra-tion of the level sensor and (ii) calibration, hysteresis detection,installed characteristics, and relative resistance of the controlvalve. During the second week, students are introduced to control engineering concepts, the main objectives being: (i) to develop anappreciation of automatic control vs. manual control; (ii) to obtain aqualitative grasp of the differences among, proportional controller(P), proportional-integral controller (PI), and proportional-integral-derivative controller (PID); (iii) to develop rules for control 286 Journal of Engineering Education July 2009Figure 2. Schematic of the Process Control Lab Test Rig. The lab was designed to mimic an industrial plant. It aims to introduc e students to the basic elements of instrumentation and control, and to develop qualitative skills of tuning PID controllers.  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License --- 294 Journal of Engineering Education July 2009APPENDIX Questions from the Pre-lab quizzes for week I, Rigs 1-6:  1. Describe briefly in the space provided below the key steps of the experimental procedure you plan to followfor the sensor calibration: 2. Describe briefly in the space provided below the key steps of the experimental procedure you plan to followfor the control valve calibration: 3. Define a sensor? Do we use sensors in the process? If yes, which are these? 4. Define an actuator? Do we use any actuators in the process? If yes which are these? 5. What is the functionality of the control valve in the process? 6. What do we use for measuring the inlet flow rate?7. What do we use for measuring the outlet flow rate? Questions from the Post-Lab quiz for week I, Rigs 1-6:  1. Analyze briefly your data obtained for the level sensor cali- bration. Sketch the level sensor characteristics. 2. Analyze briefly your data obtained for the control valve calibration and sketch the control valve characteristics. 3. Define the zeroof a sensor. What was the zero value of the level sensor obtained based on your experiments? 4. Provide a brief definition of the term controller .  5. What is the controller when the process is set to the man- ual mode?  6. What is the controller when the process is set to the auto- matic mode? 7. Is the following an open or closed system? Explain your answer clearly.8. Is the following an open or closed system? Explain your answer clearly. 9. Is there anything wrong in the following diagram? If yes, make the necessary corrections on the figurebelow.  10. Based on your answer in the previous question, please place the following signals in the correct places.a. Controller outputb. Disturbancec. Process outputd. Controller inpute. Process input f. Desired output value   21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the
many logistical problemsassociated with conducting hands-on experiments in the universitylab, such as specific lab opening hours, or safety and supervisionproblems related to the students being physically present in the lab. V. M ETHODOLOGY FOR PEDAGOGICAL EFFECTIVENESS MEASUREMENT A. Selection of the Control and Experimental Groups There were about 70 students registered for the class. In the laboratory, six experimental rigs were used, with students workingin groups of 2 or 3. Students were divided into four session groups,each of which consisted of 16–18 students. Each group used the rigfor two consecutive weeks to complete the experiments. The labteaching spread over 8 weeks from the academic week 2 until theacademic week 9 in the autumn semester of the 2007–2008 acade-mic year. In week one an introductory lecture was organized in aclassroom to all students where the experiment was described. Inthis session the laboratory was “brought into the classroom” byusing the remote laboratory mode aiming to stimulate the students’interest in the lab. A pre-lab preparation session was also organizedfor part of the groups, during which students came to the computerroom and worked on the virtual laboratory software following theprocedure from the lab manual while working under minimalsupervision. These pre-lab sessions (treatment) were applied to July 2009 Journal of Engineering Education 287Figure 3. The Process Control Lab Virtual and Remote Version Interface. The GUI was designed to mimic the hands-on lab when wor k- ing in the simulation mode. In case of proximal connection, the GUI provides an interface for data acquisition, instruments man ipulation, and PID control tuning. In cases of remote connection, it provides video transmission of the rig.  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions
by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License --- See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License --- by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
288 Journal of Engineering Education July 2009Groups 3 (G3) and 4 (G4), whereas Groups 1 (G1) and 2 (G2) had no treatment.  To guarantee equivalence as much as possible among the four groups, students were distributed evenly based on their percentageaverage in the previous academic year (the averages of the groupswere, G1 /H1100564.2 percent, G2 /H1100563.6 percent, G3 /H1100563.1 percent, and G4 /H1100563.7 percent). In the British educational system, per- centage averages are used in the final evaluations and the assign-ment of grades (A, B, etc) is subjective. The convention used in theChemical Engineering Department at Loughborough Universityis generally to use the grade A for an average above 70 percent, Bfor an average between 60 percent and 70 percent, C for averagebetween 50 percent and 60 percent, etc. Exams are usually de-signed with the aim to have an overall average between 60 percentand 70 percent, hence the groups represent average levels. Thegroups G1 and G2 represented the control group , whereas G3 and G4 were the experimental group . B. Logistical and Ethical Issues in the Experimental Design Logistical and ethical aspects of the experimental design are important to analyze to understand the experimental data. To makethe pre-lab preparatory sessions compulsory, would require changesin the course structure requiring approval by the departmental anduniversity teaching committees, and can violate generic recommen-dations related to the number of contact hours within a module.The extra hours required for the preparatory session would be possi-ble only by reducing the number of lectures or problem classes. Notmaking the virtual laboratory software available to the control groupwould have raised ethical issues related to the discrimination inusing teaching aids for parts of the class. Partially this was also thereason why minimal supervision and help was offered in thepreparatory session. To overcome the logistical and ethical con-straints, the --- was offered in thepreparatory session. To overcome the logistical and ethical con-straints, the experiments were designed so that no pre-lab prepara-tory sessions were scheduled for groups G1 and G2. However, theywere asked to prepare for the lab. The intention in the experimentswas that the control group would prepare by reading the manualand the experimental group by using the virtual lab and the manual.However to eliminate ethical issues, the lab manual and the virtuallab software were made available for students to download and usein their preparation. In the questionnaires, students from the con-trol group had to answer the questions whether and how long theyprepared from the manual and this data was used in the evaluation.Non-compulsory pre-lab sessions were scheduled for the G3 andG4 students. These were time-tabled internally trying to eliminateconflicts with the students’ other duties as much as possible.  About 8–10 students of each G3 and G4 responded to the request of attending the preparation session each time, forming theexperimental group. The average mark of the experimental groupwas 66.7 percent. Students from Groups 1 and 2 formed the controlgroup with a group average of 63.8 percent (only 2.9 percent lessthan for the experimental group). Figure 4 illustrates the methodology used for the pedagogical experiment, with X representing the equivalent groups (control andexperimental before treatment) and Y and Yt represents the resultsfrom the control and the experimental groups after treatment,respectively.  For the evaluation of the statistically significant difference be- tween the control and the experimental group (if any) in response tothe treatment the null hypothesis was used (Conover, 1998). Thenull hypothesis in this case states that, “There is no statistically significant difference in the learning outcomes between the controlgroup and the experimental group due to using the virtual lab in apre-lab preparation session.” The Mann-Whitney
experimental group due to using the virtual lab in apre-lab preparation session.” The Mann-Whitney non-parametric test (Conover, 1998) was used for accepting or rejecting the null hypothesis. According tothis approach the null hypothesis is rejected (meaning that therewas a statistically significant difference between the data) if thesignificance value ( /H9268) of the test is less than 0.05. C. Verification Stages  for the Proposition The verification was divided into two main parts: (1) verifying that the virtual lab can lead to enhanced activation of the prehen-sion dimension, and (2) verifying that this leads to better activationof the knowledge transformation dimension. For the prehension dimension activation verification, a pre-lab test was designed and was conducted just before starting the hands-on session. The pre-lab tests were given to students in both weeks 1and 2. The questions from a sample pre-lab test used in week 1 aregiven in the Appendix. The statistically significant differencesbetween the answers of the students from the control and the ex-perimental groups would indicate that a pre-lab session with virtuallab played a role in grasping information needed for the hands-onlaboratory session. D. Analysis of Knowledge Grasping Questions Q1 and Q2 of the Week 1 pre-lab test were strongly related to the hands-on laboratory session. In these questions, stu-dents were asked to develop an experimental procedure that theywill follow for calibrating and deriving the characteristics of the levelsensor of the tank and the control valve that controls the outflowrate of the tank, respectively. Questions Q3–Q7 were mainlydesigned to test relevant general knowledge of the students thatthey may have gathered through the lectures, from the remote labdemonstrations that were conducted in the classroom, or by readingthe lab manual. The results of the evaluation of the pre-lab test areshown in Table 1. Using the Mann-Whitney test, the exact signifi-cance value of Q1
pre-lab test areshown in Table 1. Using the Mann-Whitney test, the exact signifi-cance value of Q1 and Q2 were smaller than 0.05 indicating thatthe null hypothesis can be rejected, hence there is indeed strong Figure 4. Conceptual model of the pedagogical experimentation methodology. The control group had no treatment, while theexperimental group was exposed to a preparation session with the virtual laboratory.  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
statistical evidence that exposing the students to a preparatory ses- sion using the virtual laboratory has led them to an overall enhancedgrasp of the procedural tasks needed for performing the lab. Thisdemonstrates that a better activation of the prehension dimensionhas occurred due to the virtual lab preparatory session. The lowermean of the control group students is related to the fact that thosestudents never or poorly prepared for the lab (all students wereasked to prepare for the lab; the software and the lab manual wereavailable to download from the Web). Poorer results were shownwhen students had read only the manual and did not experience theprocedure with the virtual lab. The difference between the controland the experimental groups is less significant ( /H9268/H11005 0.116 /H110220.05) for the questions Q3 to Q7 though the average mean is still higherfor the experimental group.  The level sensor calibration procedure was relatively easier than the procedure for the control valve calibration. This may explain thehigher mean of Q1 compared to Q2. The pre-lab test of Week IIrevealed a similar outcome where the mean of the experimentalgroup was higher for the control group. The statistical significancewas smaller than the threshold of 0.05 ( /H9268/H11005 0.041) allowing to reject the null hypothesis. This shows that students of the experi-mental group have better activation of the prehension dimension ofKolb’s cycle because they could grasp knowledge needed for thehands-on lab operation via the virtual lab that was used in a pre-labsession. E. Analysis of the Knowledge Transformation To verify that better activation of the prehension dimension would lead to better knowledge transformation into mental models(Kolb, 1984) after the hands-on lab session, post-lab tests were con-ducted directly after the students had finished their experiments. Table 2 shows the results of the analysis of the post-lab test. In question Q1 of the Week 1 post-lab test, students
results of the analysis of the post-lab test. In question Q1 of the Week 1 post-lab test, students were asked tocreate a qualitative plot of the level sensor characteristic curve basedon their observations and the data they had collected during the ex-periment. The level sensor characteristic is represented by a simplelinear curve with no hysteresis. The students’ answers were ratherclose for both the experimental and the control groups. The exactsignificance value for Q1 was 0.302 which is larger than the thresh-old of 0.05 indicating that there is no statistically significant differ-ence between the control and the experimental groups. In questionQ2, students were asked to plot the control valve characteristic,which is nonlinear and shows hysteresis. A significantly larger por-tion (more than double) of the experimental group students coulddistinguish these features (which required a higher ability of in-depth analysis) whereas fewer of the control group students coulddiscover the hysteresis. The statistical significance value of Q2 is0.025. This value is smaller than the threshold of 0.05 indicating a high probability (97.5 percent) that the higher score is not bychance, hence the null hypothesis can be rejected. For the otherquestions (Q3–Q6, Q9 and Q10), which are rather general, stu-dents from the control and the experimental group showed closeoutcome.  Questions 7 and 8 were purely conceptual, testing the students’ understanding of open and closed loop systems. Students from theexperimental group performed much better overall in these ques-tions than students from the control group (see Table 2). It deservesmentioning that the simulation of the control valve in the virtual labis not identical to the real behavior of the physical control valve inthe test rig. The simulated control valve has linear characteristicsand no hysteresis, hence these features were not observed by the ex-perimental group students in the preparation session. Nevertheless,they showed
observed by the ex-perimental group students in the preparation session. Nevertheless,they showed higher ability of detecting these features than studentsfrom the control group. The statistical test of the in-depth questionof Week 2 post-lab test also revealed acceptable significance forrejecting the null hypothesis (exact significance was 0.013 /H110210.05). These results provide evidence that students who had better activation of the prehension dimension prior to the lab session hadmore in depth learning during the hands-on lab session. In otherwords, the transformation of knowledge through the lab experienceinto mental models (Kolb, 1984) has been more successful for stu-dents who worked on improving their prehension dimension. Thisalso indicates that constructivist higher order learning in the hands-on lab session can be improved by more activation of the otherstages of the Kolb’s experiential learning cycle.  A different behavior was also observed during the laboratory sessions in the case of the experimental group students compared tothe control group students. The former showed more interest in thehands-on lab session and insisted more on answering the pre- andpost-lab tests compared to the control group students. Groups wereinformed that the pre- and post-lab tests were voluntary and werenot included in the lab or the course final marks. Kolb’s experiential learning theory offers educators a pedagogical framework for designing their courses and contextualizing specific July 2009 Journal of Engineering Education 289Table 2. Post-lab test results of week 1 (number of samples (Experimental/Control) was 18/32). Table 1. Pre-lab test results of week 1. Number of samples (Experimental/Control) was 18/30.  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on
290 Journal of Engineering Education July 2009activities that lead to enhanced learning outcomes. The design can be on a large scale, such as a whole degree design, or on a smallerscale, such as the design of learning objects or a laboratory curricu-lum. Kolb suggests that optimal learning happens through transfor-mation of knowledge into mental models. The transformation isdone through reflective observation (RO) and active experimenta-tion (AE). However, a necessary condition for such transformation(or construction) of knowledge is that this knowledge should begrasped first. Knowledge depiction occurs via Concrete Experience(CE) or Abstract Conceptualization (AC). A reasonable balanceamong the four stages leads to optimal learning outcomes accordingto Kolb. In classical laboratories, the AE is the main active stage,which may give an explanation of poor learning outcomes duringthe laboratory learning phase and lead to propose additional labora-tory activities that would enhance the other learning stages in Kolb’scycle. In the next section different laboratory activities and theircontributions to Kolb’s learning stages are discussed and a novelmodel for conducting laboratory education is proposed in theframework of the pedagogical experiential learning theory. VI. A NIMPLEMENT ATION PROPOSAL OF KOLB ’S CYCLE FOR LABORATORY EDUCATION During the introductory lecture of the Instrumentation and Con- trol module, students were introduced to the lab using a PowerPointpresentation and the lab was operated remotely in the classroomwith the aim of providing a realistic feeling (telepresence) to studentsand stimulating them towards conducting the lab. This lecturestructure is in correlation with the Concrete Experience stage of theKolb’s cycle. At the end of the semester in the module question-naires, students were asked whether this stimulated their interest inthe lab. A significant portion, 80.6 percent, of the students answered“Yes”. One of the lectures was devoted to PID
portion, 80.6 percent, of the students answered“Yes”. One of the lectures was devoted to PID control. In this lecture the theoretical background of the PID control approach was ex-plained and the main features of the control algorithm were illus-trated by using the remote lab in the classroom. Again, a significantportion of students, 78.1 percent, found this combination useful inunderstanding the theory which enhanced the Abstract Conceptu- alization part of the Kolb’s cycle.  Well designed pre-lab test questions or preparatory sessions with the virtual laboratory will help students in contextualizing the labo-ratory objectives and assist in realizing the Concrete Experiencestage. The use of the virtual lab and the design of reflective questionsfacilitate reflection, enhancing the Reflective Observation stage.  Well designed post-lab test questions give the students a chance to reflect over their experience in the lab session. These questionsmust be designed to help with the implementation of a meaningfulmodel of the knowledge in their memory based on the lab sessionexperience. This also helps to enhance the Reflective Observationstage. Putting the pre- and post-lab testing in the context of labora-tory education will urge the students to prepare well which en-hances the Active Conceptualization stage.  According to Kolb, constructivist learning occurs in a cyclic spiral way. The optimal learning happens when all four phases ofthe learning cycle are activated. As the first cycle ends by transfer-ring knowledge into mental (or theoretical) model through experi-ence, a further higher order cycle can be started for constructinghigher order knowledge, and so on. Therefore, it is an importantobjective of engineering education, in particular, laboratory educa-tion, to motivate students towards higher levels of learning orexperimentation. In the last lecture of the course, we surveyed thestudents’ opinion about the lab. One of the questions on the ques-tionnaire was:
we surveyed thestudents’ opinion about the lab. One of the questions on the ques-tionnaire was: “Would you like the idea of conducting post-lab realexperimentation through the Internet (i.e., from your home PC)after the lab for enhancing your report or testing further ideas?” Thepossible answers were on a scale from 1 (not at all) to 6 (very much).The responses of the two groups differed considerably. The averageof the control group is 4.19/6 while the average of the experimentalgroup is 5.27/6. The Mann-Whitney non parametric test gives theexact significant value of 0.027, which is smaller than 0.05 hencethe null hypothesis can be rejected. Figure 5 shows the students’answer distributions. This demonstrates again that an enhancedactivation of the prehension dimension of Kolb’s cycle has a statisti-cally significant impact on motivating students towards furtherinquiry and experimentation; therefore providing a better construc-tivist experience for laboratory education.  Figure 5. Experimental group students willingness of conducting further experimentation after the hands-on lab session (“1” /H11549not at all, “6” /H11549very much).  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Remotely operated labs offer the chance to interested students for flexible further investigation and experimentation, i.e., they offer thepossibility of higher order learning. This additional activity may in-volve additional theory investigation (Abstract Conceptualization),Active Experimentation, and Reflective Observation. Remote labsoffer the students a chance to repeat the experiment and have furtherreflection of their hands-on session (Reflective Observation).  The virtual lab also offers a similar opportunity; however, the fundamental difference between the virtual lab and the hands-onor remote lab is the belief factor. The question related to the stu- dents’ opinion about replacing the hands-on lab with the virtual labresulted in 91.2 percent of the students rejecting this idea.  In the laboratory session, students are mainly immersed in the Active Experimentation stage of Kolb’s cycle. Poor outcome oflaboratory education can be correlated with the poor balance of theother stages of Kolb’s experiential learning cycle, since little atten-tion is normally paid to laboratory activities that can lead to con-structivist learning during the hands-on session. The results of thepedagogical experimentation shown in this paper indicate thatmodifications can be introduced to the teaching methodology according to which classical hands-on laboratories are taught.These modifications, with the aim to enhance constructivist learn-ing, are suggested in the context of Kolb’s experiential learning cycleand are implemented using recent advances in information andcommunication technologies. The mapping of the different ele-ments of the laboratory education system to Kolb’s cycle is proposedin Table 3. Figure 6 shows a conceptual model of the constructivistlaboratory based on Kolb’s experiential learning cycle. VII. C ONCLUSIONS In this paper, the learning outcomes of the laboratory session are corroborated in the context of the well known pedagogical theory,Kolb’s experiential
session are corroborated in the context of the well known pedagogical theory,Kolb’s experiential learning cycle. A proposition is introduced thatconsiders that the often poor learning outcome of the laboratorysession is mainly due to weak activation of the prehension dimensionof the learning cycle, before coming to the lab. The pedagogical ex-periments based on combined application of pre- and post-lab testsand the three dimensional laboratory (application of the combina-tion of hands-on, virtual, and remote experiments) have providedstatistical evidence of the proposition. In particular, introducing thevirtual lab in the pre-lab preparation session has lead to considerableimprovement in the conceptual understanding of the students dur-ing the hands-on lab session. It also helped to reduce the cognitiveload of students. The results demonstrate that designing engineer-ing laboratory education based on well-developed pedagogical the-ory can lead to better learning outcomes. Based on the pedagogicalexperiments, a novel model of laboratory education was introducedthat has its pedagogical background in the experiential learningtheory of Kolb. An algorithm of implementing Kolb’s cycle utiliz-ing virtual and remote modes of the hands-on lab, as well as, byintroducing additional lab activities has been proposed.  ACKNOWLEDGMENT Partial financial support by the Engineering Center of Excellence in Teaching and Learning (engCETL), Loughborough University,UK, and by The Higher Education Academy, Engineering SubjectCentre, UK, mini-project are gratefully acknowledged.  July 2009 Journal of Engineering Education 291Table 3. Kolb’s cycle mapping for laboratory education. Figure 6. Abdulwahed-Nagy Constructivist Laboratory Education Model, based on Kolb’s theory. The extra activitiesfacilitate higher order learning. CE, RO, AC, and AE correspondto the following Kolb’s model stages: Concrete Experience, ReflectiveObservation, Abstract Conceptualization, Active Experimentation.
Concrete Experience, ReflectiveObservation, Abstract Conceptualization, Active Experimentation.  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
292 Journal of Engineering Education July 2009REFERENCES Ausubel, D.P., and D. Fitzgerald. 1962. Organizer, General back- ground, and antecedent learning variables in sequential verbal-learning.Journal of Educational Psychology 53 (6): 243–49. Bender, B. 2001. Concepts for purposive and motivational teaching and learning in engineering design courses. International Journal of Engi- neering Education 17(4–5): 336–41. Campbell, D.R. 1985. Interactive graphics software for an undergraduate course in digital signal processing. Computers & Education 9 (2): 79–86. Conover, W.J. 1998. Practical nonparametric statistics . 3rd ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley. David, A., P.E. Wyrick, and L. Hilsen. 2002. Using Kolb’s Cycle to round out learning. In Proceedings of the 2002 American Society for Engineer- ing Education Annual Conference . Montréal, Quebec, Canada. Engum, S.A., P. Jeffries, and L. Fisher, 2003. Intravenous catheter training system: Computer-based education versus traditional learningmethods. The American Journal of Surgery 186 (1): 67–74. Feisel, L.D., and G.D. Peterson. 2002. A colloquy on learning objec- tives for engineering education laboratories. In Proceedings of ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition: Vive L’ingenieur! Montréal, Quebec, Canada. Feisel, L.D., and A.J. Rosa. 2005. The role of the laboratory in under- graduate engineering education. Journal of Engineering Education 94 (1): 121–30.  Felder, R., D. Woods, J. Stice, and A. Rugarcia. 2000. The future of engineering education: II. Teaching methods that work. Chemical Engi- neering Education 34 (1): 26–39. Gary, L., and J.A. Kinzel. 1981. The impact of computer graphics on mechanical engineering education at The Ohio State University. Computers & Education 5 (4): 275–87. Gillet, D, A.V. Nguyen Ngoc, and Y. Rekik. 2005. Collaborative web- based experimentation in flexible engineering education. IEEE Transac- tions on Education 48 (4): 696–704. Gladwin, R.P., D. Margerison, and S.M. Walker. 1992. --- 16 (1): 14–26. Roth, W.M. 1994. Experimenting in a constructivist high school physics laboratory. Journal of Research in Science Teaching 31 (2): 197–223. Slavin, R.E. 2005. Educational psychology . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. Smith, P.R. 1976. Computers in engineering education in the United Kingdom. Computers & Education 1 (1): 13–21. Spicer, J.I., and J. Stratford. 2001. Student perceptions of a virtual field trip to replace a real field trip. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 17 (4): 345–54. Stice, J.E. 1987. Using KoIb’s learning cycle to improve student learn- ing. Engineering Education 77 (5): 291–96. VARK. 2008. http://www.vark-learn.com/english/index.asp (last accessed October 2008). Wankat, P.C. 2004. Analysis of the first ten years of the Journal of Engineering Education . Journal of Engineering Education 93 (1): 13–21.  Weenk, G.W.H. 1999. Learning pyramid . The Netherlands: University of Twente.  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Transac- tions on Education 48 (4): 696–704. Gladwin, R.P., D. Margerison, and S.M. Walker. 1992. Computer-as- sisted learning in chemistry. Computers & Education 19 (1–2): 17–25. Gosman, A.D., B.E. Launder, F.C. Lockwood, and G.J. Reece. 1977. Computer assisted teaching of fluid mechanics and heat transfer. Comput- ers & Education 1 (3): 131–39. Gunstone, R.F. 1991. Reconstructing theory from practical experi- ence. In Practical science , ed. B. Woolnough, 67–77. Milton Keynes: Open University Press. Gurkan, D., A. Mickelson, and D. Benhaddou. 2008. Remote labora- tories for optical circuits. IEEE Transactions on Education 51 (1): 53–60.  Heise, D. 2006. Asserting the inherent benefits of hands-on laboratory projects vs. computer simulations. Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges 21 (4): 104–10. Hofstein, A., and Lunetta, V.N. 1982. The role of the laboratory in science teaching: neglected aspects of research. Review of Educational Re- search 52(2): 201–217. Hofstein, A., and V.N. Lunetta. 2004. The laboratory in science edu- cation: Foundations for the twenty-first century. Science Education 88 (1): 28–54. Ingram, D., C.J. Dickinson, L. Saunders, M. Sherriff, R. Bloch, G. Sweeney, and K. Ahmed. 1979. Application of a pharmacokinetic simu-lation program in pharmacy courses. Computers & Education 3 (4): 335–45. Johnstone, A.H., and A. Al-Shuaili. 2001. Learning in the laboratory; some thoughts from the literature. University Chemistry Education 5: 42–51.Kamis, A., and H. Topi. 2007. Network subnetting: An instance of technical problem solving in Kolb’s experiential learning cycle. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences . Waikoloa, HI. Kirschner, P.A. 1988. The laboratory in higher science education, problems, premises, and objectives.  Higher Education 17 (1): 81–90. Kolb, D.A. 1984. Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Laghari, J.R., J.L.
as the source of learning and development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Laghari, J.R., J.L. Suthar, and S. Cygan. 1990. PSPICE applications in high voltage engineering education. Computers & Education 14 (6): 455–62. Lagoudas, D.C., J.D. Whitcomb, D.A. Miller, M.Z. Lagoudas, and K.J. Shryock. 2000. Continuum mechanics in a restructured engineeringundergraduate curriculum. International Journal of Engineering Education 16 (4): 301–14. Lindsay, E.D., and M.C. Good. 2005. Effects of laboratory access modes upon learning outcomes. IEEE Transactions on Education 48 (4): 619–31. Ma, J., and J.V. Nickerson. 2006. Hands-on, simulated, and remote laboratories: A comparative literature review. ACM Computing Surveys 38 (3): 1–24. McAteer, E., D. Neil, N. Barr, M. Brown, S. Draper, and F. Henderson. 1996. Simulation software in a life sciences practical laboratory. Computers & Education 26 (1–3): 101–12. Moor, S., and P. Piergiovanni. 2003. Experiments in the classroom, ex- amples of inductive learning with classroom-friendly laboratory kits. InProceedings of the 2003 American Society for Engineering Education AnnualConference and Exposition . Nashville, TN. Piaget, J. 1978. The development of thought: Equilibration of cognitive structures . Oxford, England: Blackwell.  Plett, G.L., R.E. Ziemer, M.D. Ciletti, R. Dandapani, T. Kalkur, and M.A. Wickert. 2006. Experiences in updating the ECE curriculum withsignal processing first and Kolb/4MAT pedagogy. In Proceedings of the 2006 American Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference andExposition . Chicago, IL. Raineri, D. 2001. Virtual laboratories enhance traditional undergradu- ate biology laboratories. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 29 (4): 160–62. Ronen, M., and M. Eliahu. 2000. Simulation—a bridge between the- ory and reality: The case of electric circuits. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 16 (1): 14–26. Roth, W.M. 1994. Experimenting in a constructivist high school physics laboratory.
AUTHORS ’ BIOGRAPHIES Mahmoud Abdulwahed’s main research interest is in the integration of IT and Cybernetics into social sciences. He iscurrently pursuing a Ph.D. degree at the Engineering Centerof Excellence in Teaching and Learning and the ChemicalEngineering Department, Loughborough University, UnitedKingdom.  Address: engCETL, Keith Green Building, Loughborough Uni- versity, Loughborough LE11 3TU; telephone: ( /H110011) 44.1509. 227189; fax: ( /H110011) 44.1509.227181; e-mail: m.abdulwahed@ lboro.ac.uk.Zoltan K Nagy is senior lecturer in the Chemical Engineering Department, Loughborough University since 2005. Prior to hiscurrent position Z.K. Nagy has held teaching and research posi-tions at the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, USA,University of Stuttgart, Germany, ETH, Zurich, Switzerland,University of Heidelberg, Germany, and the “Babes-Bolyai” Uni-versity of Cluj, Romania. Dr. Nagy is the recipient of the 2007Royal Academy of Engineering and ExxonMobile Excellence inTeaching Award.  Address: Chemical Engineering Department, Loughborough Uni- versity, Loughborough LE11 3TU, UK; telephone: ( /H1100144) 1509.222516; fax: ( /H1100144) 1509.223923; e-mail: z.k.nagy@lboro.ac.uk.  July 2009 Journal of Engineering Education 293  21689830, 2009, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2009.tb01025.x by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [08/10/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
El artículo "Applying Kolb’s Experiential Learning Cycle for Laboratory Education" de Mahmoud Abdulwahed y Zoltan K. Nagy, publicado en el Journal of Engineering Education en julio de 2009, propone un modelo innovador para la educación en laboratorios, fundamentado en la teoría del aprendizaje experiencial de David Kolb. Este enfoque se aplica en el contexto del laboratorio de control de procesos en el Departamento de Ingeniería Química de la Universidad de Loughborough, Reino Unido, utilizando tecnologías modernas y una combinación de sesiones de laboratorio remotas, virtuales y prácticas.

### Resumen Detallado:

1. **Contexto y Justificación:**
   - La educación en ingeniería resalta la importancia de la experiencia práctica en laboratorios, esencial para desarrollar habilidades en diseño, resolución de problemas y pensamiento analítico. Estudios previos han evidenciado la necesidad de mejorar la experiencia de laboratorio en los currículos de ciencias e ingeniería.

2. **Modelo Propuesto:**
   - El modelo se basa en el ciclo de aprendizaje experiencial de Kolb, que incluye cuatro etapas: experiencia concreta, observación reflexiva, conceptualización abstracta y experimentación activa. Los autores identifican que el aprendizaje deficiente en laboratorios se debe a una activación insuficiente de la dimensión de "prehensión" del ciclo de Kolb.
   - Para abordar esta deficiencia, se incorporan actividades como pruebas previas y posteriores al laboratorio y sesiones virtuales, alineadas con las etapas del ciclo de Kolb, promoviendo un aprendizaje constructivista.

3. **Metodología y Resultados:**
   - Se realizó un análisis cuantitativo comparando los resultados de aprendizaje de un grupo experimental que utilizó el nuevo modelo con un grupo de control que siguió métodos tradicionales. Los resultados mostraron una mejora significativa en el grupo experimental, validando la efectividad del modelo.
   - La combinación de sesiones prácticas y actividades complementarias permitió a los estudiantes participar activamente y reflexionar sobre sus experiencias, aplicando conceptos teóricos en situaciones prácticas.

4. **Conclusiones:**
   - Este trabajo representa un avance significativo en la educación de laboratorio, siendo el primer modelo exhaustivo basado en la teoría de Kolb. Los autores concluyen que la integración de tecnologías modernas y un enfoque estructurado en el aprendizaje experiencial puede mejorar notablemente la educación en laboratorios de ingeniería.

5. **Palabras Clave:**
   - Aprendizaje experiencial de Kolb, educación en ingeniería de laboratorio, laboratorios remotos y virtuales.

### Evolución de la Educación en Ingeniería:
- La educación en ingeniería ha evolucionado desde un enfoque práctico predominante hasta una integración de teoría y práctica, especialmente a finales del siglo XIX. Sin embargo, en las últimas décadas, ha habido un cambio hacia métodos pedagógicos centrados en aulas y conferencias, lo que ha reducido la atención a la educación en laboratorios.
- Se menciona que solo un 6% de los artículos en el Journal of Engineering Education entre 1993 y 2002 incluían "laboratorio" como palabra clave, indicando una falta de énfasis en este aspecto educativo. A pesar de esto, se reconoce que la pedagogía de laboratorio es un área de investigación prometedora, especialmente con el uso creciente de tecnologías de información y comunicación (TIC).

### Problemas en el Aprendizaje en Laboratorios:
- Se argumenta que los beneficios esperados de las experiencias en laboratorio no siempre se materializan, y se citan estudios que respaldan esta afirmación. La literatura sugiere que los laboratorios deben ser plataformas que faciliten la comprensión conceptual y el desarrollo de habilidades de diseño.
- La teoría del aprendizaje experiencial de Kolb se presenta como un modelo pedagógico adecuado para la educación en ingeniería, enfatizando la importancia de un equilibrio entre las cuatro fases del ciclo de aprendizaje.

### Implementación del Modelo de Kolb:
- Se describe cómo se implementó el ciclo de Kolb en el laboratorio de control de procesos, utilizando un software de laboratorio virtual y remoto. Los estudiantes participaron en sesiones de preparación que mejoraron su comprensión y retención de información.
- Se llevaron a cabo experimentos pedagógicos que demostraron que la introducción de un laboratorio virtual durante la preparación previa a la sesión de laboratorio mejoró significativamente la comprensión conceptual de los estudiantes.

### Resultados y Evaluación:
- Los resultados de las pruebas previas y posteriores al laboratorio mostraron que los estudiantes del grupo experimental, que utilizaron el laboratorio virtual, lograron una mejor activación de la dimensión de aprehensión del ciclo de Kolb, lo que se tradujo en un aprendizaje más profundo durante las actividades prácticas.
- Se concluye que la combinación de laboratorios virtuales y sesiones prácticas puede enriquecer la experiencia educativa, facilitando un aprendizaje constructivista y motivando a los estudiantes a explorar más allá de las sesiones de laboratorio.

### Referencias y Biografías de los Autores:
- Se incluyen referencias a estudios y artículos relevantes que respaldan las afirmaciones del artículo, así como biografías de los autores, destacando su experiencia y contribuciones en el campo de la educación en ingeniería.

En resumen, el artículo de Abdulwahed y Nagy propone un modelo educativo que integra teoría y práctica, utilizando el ciclo de aprendizaje de Kolb para mejorar la experiencia de aprendizaje en laboratorios de ingeniería, resultando en mejores resultados académicos y una comprensión más profunda de los conceptos por parte de los estudiantes.
