Barriers to graduate employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria Elimma Ezeani Aberdeen Business School, Law School, Robert Gordon University, Aberdeen, UK Abstract Purpose –This paper aims to investigate the challenges faced by Nigerian university graduates youths, in ﬁnding suitable employment or in embarking on entrepreneurship ventures. Design/methodology/approach –The research investigates the barriers to graduate employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria starting from the hypothesis that there are other factors besides scarcity of jobs responsible for unemployment in Nigeria. Data from two qualitative research activities were analysed and the results tested, to determine the extent to which the research ﬁndings supported the initial hypothesis. Findings –Theﬁndings con ﬁrm the researcher ’s hypothesis that there are a number of factors, the two main ones being poor government policy and investment in education and low skills and technicalincompetence of graduates, which constitute barriers to employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria. Practical implications –Theﬁndings are clear on the urgency to revisit the Nigerian education and skills curricula and its capacity to facilitate employment and entrepreneurship, and government policy- making in this regard. Originality/value –This study bases its recommendations for addressing Nigeria ’s high graduate unemployment on empirical direct engagement with the primary stakeholder, that is, the Nigerian graduate. Itclearly identi ﬁes that it is not merely scarcity of jobs but a myriad of factors requiring the urgent attention of both public and private sectors that constitute barriers to graduate employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria. Keywords Emerging economies, Graduates, Government, Higher education, Entrepreneurship education, Entry barriers Paper type Research paper 1. Introduction Nigeria has a high number of young people, and is sub-Saharan Africa ’s most populous country. It is, depending on who is
of young people, and is sub-Saharan Africa ’s most populous country. It is, depending on who is speaking, Africa ’s strongest economy, a position, which can be debated, that alternates with South Africa. It has, despite its capacity to diversify, continued a policy of mono-dependency on oil which contributes its largest share of income. The country retains a signi ﬁcantly increasing high rate of unemployment: 23.9 per cent as at January 2012 ( Federal Government of Nigeria, 2013a ) down to a still high 14.2 per cent as at January 2017 ( Federal Government of Nigeria, 2017 ). The relevance of education to future employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria remains relatively under-researched, particularly in terms of exploring what those in or out of education perceive as barriers and challenges. Ihugba et al. (2013 , p. 28), cite, amongst a myriad of factors, “low standard of education ”as one of the “challenges faced by entrepreneurs in developing countries ”. However, an empirical investigation into the career The author wishes to thank Chiamaka Ezeani, MEd Leadership and Management (OU), for her assistance with research data and Mazni MD Yusof, MSc Information and Library Studies (RGU), for initial research assistance on this paper. The author is grateful to Dr Joseph Mante (RGU) for hiscritical review and comments.JEEE 10,3 428 Received 14 February 2017 Revised 17 November 2017 11 January 2018 Accepted 11 January 2018 Journal of Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies Vol. 10 No. 3, 2018 pp. 428-446 © Emerald Publishing Limited 2053-4604DOI 10.1108/JEEE-02-2017-0009The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at: www.emeraldinsight.com/2053-4604.htm
intentions of university students who had bene ﬁted from a semester course in entrepreneurship found that “entrepreneurship education impacts positively on the career intentions of tertiary education students ”(Ekpoh and Eket, 2011 ,p .1 7 6 ) . The researcher ’s hypothesis is that there are a variety of factors responsible for poor employment and entrepreneurship opportunities in Nigeria, not just the scarcity of available jobs and that some of these factors weigh more heavily on a graduate ’s ability to gain employment or engage in entrepreneurship, than others. What was missing from thediscourse and policy planning measures for addressing graduate unemployment and the low level of sustained entrepreneurship activity in Nigeria was a veri ﬁable and validated body of research on the issue. This research aims to ﬁll this gap. First, it engages with the primary stakeholder, that is, the Nigerian university graduate, to assess barriers to employment and entrepreneurship. Second, it identi ﬁes the myriad of factors which are barriers that have been previously identi ﬁed in existing literature and tests the relevance of these factors in the Nigerian context. The results of the research are validated by consultation with other stakeholders including education providers in Nigeria. Fourth, the research results dispel a common myth that scarcity of jobs alone is the reason for highgraduate unemployment in Nigeria and identi ﬁes the urgent need for public –private partnership to address these barriers. The results of the research should be invaluable to drafters of education curricula and policymakers, as it shows what factors need to be tackledif barriers to graduate employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria are to be addressed effectively. To test the aforementioned hypothesis, the research project comprised two research activities: (1) Research Activity 1 on education and youth employment (RA1). (2) Research Activity 2 on education employment and entrepreneurship (RA2).
youth employment (RA1). (2) Research Activity 2 on education employment and entrepreneurship (RA2). The literature review is set out in Section 2. Section 3 presents an overview of the research framework and the methodology adopted for the research. The results and key ﬁndings are presented in Section 4. Section 5 engages in discussion and analysis of the ﬁndings, and Section 6 reviews the implications for research, practice and society and limitations of the study. The conclusions are presented in Section 7. 2. Literature review Given their limited resources, life and work experience, young people face unique constraints and greater barriers than older-age cohorts ( Schoof, 2006 , p. xii). Studies from the USA for example suggests that “[L]evel of education is the most important factor in identifying entrants into skilled services self-employment; probability of entry risessubstantially at each of the higher levels of college education ”(Bates, 1995 , p. 151). Later a UK research notes that the: Typical entrepreneur in the UK is white, male, aged 36 years old and possesses a higher education qualiﬁcation (SBS, 2002) with over 60 per cent of entrepreneurs in the 25-44 years old age bracket. (Robertson et al., 2003 ). A study into the effect of education on employment success again from the USA in the 1990s conﬁrmed that contrary to “the myth of the poorly educated entrepreneur ”(Robinson and Sexton, 1994 , p. 143), “a general education has a strong positive in ﬂuence on entrepreneurship in terms of becoming self-employed and success ”(Robinson and Sexton, 1994, p. 142).Barriers to graduate employment 429
The body of research dealing with entrepreneurship in emerging economies is, on the whole, limited ( Bruton et al. , 2008 ;Urban and Ratsimanetrimanana, 2015 ). However, a review of the literature identi ﬁed two common approaches to solutions for unemployment and support for entrepreneurship. These include the role of government policies andprogrammes and the role of education. 2.1 Role of policies and programmes in promoting entrepreneurship and facilitating employment opportunities Previous studies of resource-rich developing countries with a vibrant youth demographic emphasise the problem of skills shortage and other attendant problems with accessingemployment for young people: Timor-Leste ( Lundahl and Sjöholm, 2009 ) and South Africa (Allais, 2012 ). Similarly in Nigeria where the economy is hugely dependent on oil, the local capacity for jobs or indigenous businesses in the oil industry is also limited by a skills shortage. In a study of the need for human capital in the oil and gas industries in Nigeria, theauthors found that local Nigerian universities are not structured to produce competentgraduates for the oil industry at a time when Nigeria should be exporting technicallycompetent professionals ( Ekebafe et al., 2010 ). A study of Banks Creation and Consultants in Nigeria ’s Job Program suggests that employment creation can be better attained via a partnership of the private and public sectors ( Owualah, 1999 ). Oni (2012) emphasised the vital role of government policies to complement the efforts made by the private sector although in Nigeria ’s case, those policies have not always been successful or sustainable. Most of the programmes were notsustainable owing to poor implementation, ﬁnancing, constant changes in government and other administrative issues. Incidentally, some of the best early (pre 2008) programmes were of little effect; a study on Operation Feed the Nation , which was designed to facilitate agricultural entrepreneurship, showed that
Feed the Nation , which was designed to facilitate agricultural entrepreneurship, showed that statistically, there were no signi ﬁcant increases in the use of farm input by programme participant and only mild increases in total land areacultivated by farmers ( Uwakah et al.,1 9 8 0 ). Effective government policies to advance entrepreneurship and innovation in SMEs are therefore of importance, not least because young ﬁrms can be productive and can engineer employment ( Demirgüç-Kunt, 2011 ). There is indeed, a role for both public and private partnership in this regard. Such partnership can assist in creating a conducive environment for employment opportunities and entrepreneurship by, for example, narrowing theinformation asymmetry between SMEs and ﬁnancial institutions and encouraging big ﬁrms to support small enterprises ( Igwe et al., 2013 pp. 96-97). Countries, especially those who wish to further stimulate economic growth, need to adopt workable policies but to do so in sectors where they stand to have a market advantage. For instance, technological entrepreneurship has become a source of job creation in Korea. It has been found that high-tech ventures systematically supported by the Korean Governmentachieved a signi ﬁcantly higher level of innovation and job creation than other small ﬁrms ( Lee and Gang, 2010 ). The Malaysian Government has also engaged in the development of biotechnology, nanotechnology, photonics, ICT and advanced manufacturing in the country by providing various training programmes. It also promotes and develops new economic sub-sectors in manufacturing, services and agriculture as a priority in job creation. Hence,job creation has arisen in areas such as environmental management, environmentalengineering, pollution minimization, waste management and R&D. As the new sub-sectorsin the economy have grown, so has the demand for experts and highly skilled professionals (Malaysia, Ministry of Human Resources, 2006 ).JEEE 10,3 430
What advantages does speci ﬁc (sectoral) entrepreneurship education or training offer for entrepreneurship and employment? Assan (2012) conducted a case study in Tutume, north-eastern district of Botswana, to inve stigate whether an entrepreneurial skills training project contributed to greater employment in Botswana. The ﬁndings noted that the vocational training had led to job creation in the Tutume district and contributed toincreased pro ﬁt-making capacity of youth-owned ent erprises. However there were still challenges including: /C15limited domestic market; /C15shortage of subsidies; /C15high production costs; /C15shortage of staff; /C15lack of commitment by some youth entrepreneurs; and /C15low income. The study recommended a refocus on the training towards creativity and innovativethinking, peer assistance, establishment of retail co-operatives and target setting andmonitoring of projects ( Assan, 2012 ). While agriculture is a promising sector for job creation (and the participants in our inquiry agreed), in almost all communities across the world where arable land is availableand there is a young potentially strong workforce, the right support remains crucial to thedevelopment of agricultural entrepreneurial culture among higher education students( Khayri et al.,2 0 1 1 ). The right support can also be successfully used at a younger level, for example, in secondary school. Results from a study carried out in a Norwegian uppersecondary school indicate that entrepreneurship education programmes are able to in ﬂuence entrepreneurial intentions among children with different social backgrounds and at a youngage (Johansen and Clausen, 2011 ). By contrast, a similar study by Mahadea et al. (2011) into South Africa ’s level of early-stage total entrepreneurial activity (TEA) recorded poorer results partly due to skills and resource limitations. However, the study found that ifentrepreneurship education is introduced at the secondary school level, South Africa ’s
that ifentrepreneurship education is introduced at the secondary school level, South Africa ’s base for entrepreneurial capacity can be enhanced with more skilled young people starting upopportunity ﬁrms and necessity ventures ( Mahadea et al., 2011 ). 2.2 Role of education in promoting employment and entrepreneurship It has been argued that a huge amount of wasteful government spending is attached to misguided and even pernicious policies on education in the misguided belief that morespending in the sector as opposed to vocational training, guarantees economic success( Wolf, 2002 ). Nevertheless, studies on education continually con ﬁrm its importance: /C15early analysis on the effects of education as an institution for society ’s success (Meyer, 1977 ); /C15role of higher education as a stimulus for growth and well-being of the individual in society ( UNESCO, 1991 ); /C15role of education as an essential factor in economic development (Ilhan, 2001); /C15relationship between education, society and development in the Caribbean society (Joseph, 2007 ); and /C15importance of education in the entrepreneurial process ( Arthur et al., 2012 ).Barriers to graduate employment 431
Other projects and studies have examined how effective education is for employment in the global workplace ( Playfoot and Hall (2009) ; the approaches to supporting young people who are not in education (UK) ( Nelson and O ’Donnell, 2012 ); a review of how to support the future of education for employment and development in South Africa ( Chatham House UK, 2014 ); and the limited impact graduate turnout has on graduate employment in Nigeria (Akinyemiet al. , 2014). Surveys on the issues of education and employment by Mckinsey have also examined the factors that inform the design of a suitable system that works to guaranteethat young people can move from education to employment. These factors includeaddressing a critical shortage of skills, impact of violence in society, role of government,families, civil programmes, etc., in the process, and the fact that half of the youths surveyedwere not sure that their post-secondary education had actually improved their chances ofsecuring employment ( Mourshed et al.,2 0 1 2 ). A further Mckinsey study undertook a speci ﬁc focus on how to get Europe ’s high numbers of unemployed youths into employment. The ﬁndings here indicated a number of problems –again the issue of skills shortage, the cost of higher education and the dif ﬁculty young people in this part of the world faced when making the transition from education to employment ( Mourshed et al.,2 0 1 4 ). Most of these studies mentioned considered reports from the International Labour Organisation (ILO), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)and the United Nations Educational Social and Cultural Organisation; the consensus is thatwithout the required skill set, young educated people are no more likely to gain goodemployment easily than their uneducated counterparts can. Entrepreneurship with itsgreater promise of self-employment and in the long term, employment for others and wealthcreation in society is also far-fetched, without appropriate
term, employment for others and wealthcreation in society is also far-fetched, without appropriate vocational or other training andsupport including ﬁnancial support and investment. A report by the Global Business School Network (GBSN) examining the challenges facing the global society identi ﬁed the shortage of employment and entrepreneurship potential, with the latter being ever more crucial tofacilitating employment opportunities in society ( GBSN, 2013 ). Speciﬁc entrepreneurship education has been championed as a necessity for developing countries, but research suggests that the nature of entrepreneurship education matters – transferring “expert ”ideas about entrepreneurship training from one society to another do not necessarily yield success. This has been observed in a study on entrepreneurshipeducation in Asia ( Dana, 2001 ). A similar view is supported in a review of entrepreneurship education and employment in Nigeria ( Akhuemonkhan et al. , 2013 ). In addition, another view holds that an important approach to tackling youth unemployment and challenges toentrepreneurship in Nigeria would be supplementing entrepreneurship education withwork-based training ( Salami, 2013 ). Salami notes that a targeted approach to capitalise on those sectors that hold more attraction for young people such as telecommunications andtechnology, a re-orientation of values that divert youths away from the idea of easy moneyor get-rich quick schemes and a re-engineered approach to agricultural entrepreneurshipwould be bene ﬁcial to such efforts in the Nigerian context ( Salami, 2013 ). 3. Overview of research framework There is an overall need to address youth unemployment and stimulate entrepreneurship activity in emerging economies including in Nigeria. However effective policy-making mustbe based on identi ﬁed barriers which can then be directly targeted in government action and investment, and addressed by educational curricula. Figure 1 shows those factors which the
and investment, and addressed by educational curricula. Figure 1 shows those factors which the researcher believes are essential to employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria.JEEE 10,3 432
3.1 Methodology 3.1.1 Samples and data. The key objective of the research was to determine whether the absence of the factors in Figure 1 are indeed barriers to graduate unemployment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria. The research question sought to ﬁnd out which of these factors were the least or most relevant, from the perspectives of Nigerian graduates themselves. Todo this, the research adopted a qualitative approach ( Bryman, 2015 ;Silverman, 2015 ; Kothari, 2004 ). It relied on numerical data collated from issued surveys in its analysis (Maxwell, 2010 ). Two research activities were carried out. The ﬁrst, Research Activity 1 (RA1), was a random survey of Nigerian graduates on issues related to education and youth employment. A second survey, Research Activity 2 (RA2), on education employment andentrepreneurship was a purposive sampling of 44 participants on an MBA programme at the Lagos Business School, Nigeria. Since the focus of the study is on Nigeria, all the research participants in both surveys were Nigerian graduates only. Participation in both surveys was independent and voluntary. Table I shows an overview of the participants from RA1 (2011) and RA2 (2013). Both activities used prepared questio nnaires designed on the online survey platform, SurveyMonkey. The responses for both surveys were designed to beanonymous, i.e. individual resp onses did not bear the subject ’s identi ﬁcation. The small scope of the research exercise also meant that a qualitative as opposed to a purely quantitative approach which would require larger numbers of research subjects, was more suitable for the study ( Creswell, 2014 , p. 120). 4. Results and key ﬁndings Closed-ended questions allowed for participants to choose preferred options. Following receipt o fr e s p o n s e sf r o me a c hs u r v e y ,t h ed a t aw e r ec o l l a ted electronically to develop a clear picture of the participants ’views. Thereafter the collated data from RA1 and RA2, respectively, wereFigure 1.
the participants ’views. Thereafter the collated data from RA1 and RA2, respectively, wereFigure 1. Essential factors the absence of which constitute barriers to employment and entrepreneurship Barriers to graduate employment 433
Participants ’overviewResponse rate (%) Participants IdentityAge (years)Completion of NYSC programme (%)Minimum qualificationGender (%) Male:FemaleIdentifies barriers to graduate employment and entrepreneurship? RA1(July-August 2011) 86.2 29 Nigerian 25-40 100 First degree N/A Yes RA2 (May-June 2013) 100 44 Nigerian 20-39 100 First degree 57:43 Yes Source: Data from research activity on education and employment (RA1) and on education, employment and entrepreneurship (RA2) (Ezeani 2017)Table I. Overview of participants in research on barriers to employment and entrepreneurship inNigeriaJEEE 10,3 434
interpreted by evaluating the similarities between the participants ’responses and the initial hypothesis. A comprehensive analysis of the ov erlapping responses was then undertaken with a view to assessing the weight the participants placed on those nine factors essential to graduate employment and entrepreneurship opportunities in Nigeria. Graduate education in Nigeria was the common factor amongst participants in both research activities and de ﬁned the scope of this study. In Figure 1 the researcher ’s hypothesis contemplated that the nine factors highlighted were all relevant to graduate employment and entrepreneurship. From interpretation of the data in both RA1 and RA2,the weight placed on the relevance of each factor varied. From the research ﬁndings, the barriers to graduate employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria have been set out on a simple scale of 0-12, to correspond to their frequency in the participants ’responses. 0 indicates the factor found to be least relevant and 12, the factor most relevant. The results of the research are shown in hierarchical order in Figure 2 . This result shows that the participants corroborated the researcher ’s hypothesis, that there are barriers to employment and entrepreneurship which graduate education alonedoes not address. To test the validity of the above results in Figure 2 , between 2014 and 2015, the views of some of the participants in RA1 and RA2, and other independent reviewers were further consulted for their feedback on the research ﬁndings. These persons were randomly sampled and the results forwarded to them. The independent reviewers ’feedback analysed at least one of the following categories: /C15MBA students not part of the survey; /C15academics and managers in education and training; and /C15self-employed persons, entrepreneurs. Like the participants in both research activities, these persons were Nigerians, in keeping with the approach of the research. The consulted persons agreed with the research
in keeping with the approach of the research. The consulted persons agreed with the research ﬁndings. They however emphasised that the greater responsibility for addressing these barriers lay with the Nigerian government. The feedback received proposed that poor governmentpolicy and investment was not limited to government ’s inability to fund the education sector. It also extended to the inability of the Nigerian Government to provide quality education at all levels from nursery to graduate education, implement policies that support Figure 2. Barriers to graduate employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria02468 1 0 1 2Unrealis/g415c Pay Expecta/g415onsPrivate Sector SupportCulture and Social A/g427tudesLack of Crea/g415vity and Innova/g415onPoor Transferable SkillsPoor Founda/g415onal Educa/g415onPoor Government Policy and InvestmentLow Skills and Technical Incompetence Source:  Results of research on barriers to graduate and employmen t  and entrepreneurship in Nigeria. (Ezeani 2017)Barriers to graduate employment 435
entrepreneurship activities for indigenous entrepreneurs, and reduce dif ﬁculties in accessing available jobs in Nigeria. 4.1 Key ﬁndings from Research Activity 1 (2011) The key ﬁndings from RA1 are shown in Table II . A transition stage from university to the workplace in Nigeria is provided under the National Youth Service Corps (NYSC) programme. Since its creation in 1973, the programme has been compulsory for all Nigerian graduates. However most participants did not want tobe employed in their place of service or were not retained by their employers. This raisesquestions about the effective use of this graduate programme to facilitate employment andentrepreneurship. On questions regarding pay expectations, most of the participantsresponded that they wanted a much higher wage than the average. None of the participantsthought that a monthly income of less than ₦40,000 (c. $230) was a living wage and yet most employers are likely to offer salaries around this amount. 4.2 Key ﬁndings from Research Activity 2 (2013) The key ﬁndings from RA2 are shown in Table III . RA2 sampled the views of MBA students from the Lagos Business School, Lagos (Pan- African University). When asked whether they intended to set up business alone or with another person after their studies, over 79 per cent of the participants ’surveyed answered in the af ﬁrmative, suggesting that there is a real interest in entrepreneurship amongst the participants. The participants did not consider that Nigeria ’s educational system adequately prepared the youth for opportunities in employment and entrepreneurship; indeed only onerespondent agreed with the suggestion. This is an intriguing ﬁnding considering that the participants were all products of the country ’s education system and, in fact, were engaged in studies in a Nigerian institution at the time they were responding to the survey. Commonly accepted challenges amongst the Nigerian populace such as excessive government bureaucracy, competition,
challenges amongst the Nigerian populace such as excessive government bureaucracy, competition, insecurity and even corruption were not considered signiﬁcant barriers to entrepreneurship. Over 90 per cent suggested that entrepreneurship was a better option for the Nigerian graduate in the future and all the participants were ofthe view that the private sector was best suited to support wealth creation in general. 5. Discussion and analysis Because all the research participants had undergone the compulsory NYSC programme, it is useful to provide a brief background on the relevance of the said programme to the researchproject. Starting with about 2,364 graduates in 1973, the NYSC programme has graduatedover 250,000 corp members annually ( News Agency of Nigeria, 2014 ). They were the 38th cohort in a long line of young men and women who having completed higher education and were mandated under Decree No 24, of 22 May 1973, to serve their country with “with a view to the proper encouragement and development of common ties among the youths of Nigeriaand the promotion of national unity ”(Federal Government of Nigeria, 2018 ). Yet in RA1, most participants either did not want to be employed in their place of service or were notretained by their employers under the NYSC programme. Why then does this long-runningexercise in mobility not translate into successes in innovations, entrepreneurship, jobcreation? It is clear both from the low interest in working for the NYSC employer and the apparent disinterest of those graduates surveyed in RA1 in being retained in their NYSC placements,that the NYSC plays a very limited role in bridging the gap between education and employment in Nigeria. This is unfortunate. The focus on national unity in the objectives ofJEEE 10,3 436
Survey findings No of participantsEmployed in NYSC placement (%)Benefitted from NYSC skills programme (%)Top 3 sectors for employmentBottom 3 sectors for employmentMain barrier to graduateemploymentDifficulty getting a job (%)Minimum pay expected/month RA1 29 15 20 Private sector trade and business; banking;educationManufacturing; oil and gas; telecommunicationPoor government policy and investment90 ₦100,000 (c. $575) Source: Data from research activity on education and employment (RA1, 2011)Table II. Key findings from RA1: education and youth employment (RA1, 2011)Barriers to graduate employment 437
Survey findingsNo of participantsGender/ Male:Female ratio (%)Top 3 sectors for entrepreneurshipBottom 3 sectors for entrepreneurshipMain barriers to graduate entrepreneurshipConsidered it difficult to set up a profitable business (%)Minimum proposed qualification foremployment or entrepreneurship RA2 44 57:43 Agriculture; trade andbusiness; oil andgasBanking; education;professionalservicesPoor managementskills93 University degree Source: Data from research activity on education, employment and entrepreneurship (RA2, 2013). (Ezeani, 2017)Table III. Key findings from RA2: education employment and entrepreneurship(RA2, 2013)JEEE 10,3 438
the programme is laudable but limiting. The NYSC programme could equally serve more effectively as a transition phase from the school to the work environment. The NYSC remains primarily an exercise in geographical mobility for the Nigerian graduate, and it is not always a pleasant experience. The deaths of Youth corpers caught inthe religious-themed riots in northern Nigeria and the rising Boko Haram insurgency in theearly part of 2013 year are horri ﬁc deterrents to any parent or child thinking of national service. The programme is also narrow in its focus, limiting its engagement with the youth corpers to a year in which it relies wholly on the scarce availability of jobs in the public orprivate sector to offer placements to graduates. As the ﬁndings from RA1 showed, even where support for entrepreneurship schemes was available, not many graduates knew ofthem or had bene ﬁtted from them. From the results in RA1, the three sectors selected as offering the least opportunities for graduate employment were manufacturing, oil and gas and telecommunication. It could be argued that Nigeria may be missing an opportunity in areas of competitive advantage given its young labour force. The participants clearly recognise that these sectors are notaccessible to them. For instance, oil and gas is Nigeria ’s main source of national income yet from the results of the research, graduates are not accessing the sector for jobs andentrepreneurship opportunities. To carry out the work of oil exploration, technicalknowledge, technology and corporate expertise are conditional to the success of oilexploration activities, and all these require human capital whether it is to develop andimplement technical expertise, to implement existing and develop new technology and to facilitate corporate activity and market growth in this area. Nigerian universities must therefore ensure that they are producing graduates with the skill sets required foremployment or entrepreneurship opportunities in
producing graduates with the skill sets required foremployment or entrepreneurship opportunities in the sector. Policymakers must alsoexamine and address the sector ’s capacity to absorb Nigerian graduates. The results of both research activities show that there is a concern with the quality of education and skills shortages in Nigeria. There was an almost uniform perception that onlyuniversity education put an applicant ’s capacity to gain employment at an advantage. This view suggests there must be intense competition amongst university graduates for the few available jobs, with non-university degree holders at a distinct disadvantage in theemployment market. It also suggests that there is a dissatisfaction and perhaps a lack ofconﬁdence in post-secondary education similar to the Mckinsey ﬁndings mentioned earlier ( Mourshed et al. , 2012 ,2014). Previous studies have shown that poor infrastructure, poor teaching quality and falling standards are all contributory factors to low-quality educationin Nigeria ( Odia and Omofonman, 2007 ;Duze, 2011 ). Government budgetary allocation has been on the decrease just as constant strikes by school teachers, especially at secondary and university levels, has been persistent. For instance, there has been a severe cut in theeducation budget from its pre-1970 over 40 per cent of the budget allocation, to 8 per cent inthe 1980 ’s and down to its 3 per cent allocation in the 2011 national budget; the actual total was 6 per cent of which 3 per cent was recurrent expenditure ( El-Rufai, 2011 ). In 2013, the Nigerian Government however increased the education allocation to 8 per cent of thenational budget ( Federal Government of Nigeria, 2013b ). This is still too little for quality education. Case studies on entrepreneurship conducted by the RA2 participants ’institution, the Lagos Business School (LBS), had previously found that where founders of businesses“possess managerial capabilities, they may provide enough continuity and
founders of businesses“possess managerial capabilities, they may provide enough continuity and direction in the company ’s transition from birth to growth ”( Alos and Bamiro, 2005 , p. xxvii). The lack of skills was also identi ﬁed as a barrier to entrepreneurship in RA2. The researcher noted that while poor power supply was in the set of options available on this question of barriers toBarriers to graduate employment 439
entrepreneurship, it was placed fourth. It is curious that the participants ignored the importance of power supply without which the ef ﬁciency and success of twenty- ﬁrst- century entrepreneurship ventures is in doubt. On the other hand however, as most homes and businesses in Nigeria rely on generators for their power supply, it could be that the participants were only re ﬂecting the realities of the Nigerian business environment with its persistent absence of stable power supply. The responses to those survey questions evaluating the impact of culture and attitudes on employment and entrepreneurship are also noteworthy. The results in RA1 show that poor government policy and investment are a main barrier to employment. While the participants in RA2 did not place much reliance on the government to create jobs, the participants in RA2 suggested that creating jobs in the society and wealth re-distribution are the two main objectives of wealth creation. Personal satisfaction and making pro ﬁtf o r the enterprise were selected as third and fourth, respectively, on the list of options, an interesting result from the survey. The researcher is aware that there is a social welfare dimension to traditional business culture in Nigeria. Enterprises are mainly family-owned businesses and businesses typically operate a single leadership model structure. There is therefore, in the researcher ’s view, an inconsistency between the actual culture of entrepreneurship in Nigeria and the responses provided by the participants. This is because the two main factors chosen –creating jobs in society and wealth re-distribution –suggest a social altruism at odds with traditional and pragmatic views of wealth creation in the Nigerian society, i.e. to make pro ﬁt and thus provide for the family. As there was no follow-up on the instant research survey, the root of this inconsistency between the participants ’views and commonly held opinion is not clear. It may be owed to “Western ”or
the participants ’views and commonly held opinion is not clear. It may be owed to “Western ”or academic theories of entrepreneurship and wealth creation which have been studied by the participants in RA2, in the course of their MBA programme. AsDana (2001) andAkhuemonkhan et al. (2013) cited earlier noted, the transfer of ideas on entrepreneurship from one society to the other may not always be ideal. 6. Implications and limitations of studyTheﬁndings are clear on the role of the government and the education system to urgently address the barriers that sti ﬂe employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria. There is also an urgency to revisit the role of the NYSC programme and Nigeria ’s education and skills curricula. The further feedback from those consulted to validate the results and ﬁndings of the research project also highlight the need for targeted policies and more effective government investment. Some recommendations are as follows. Government policy and investment : The Nigerian Government has to invest more in the education sector. Policies encouraging local capacity in economically viable areas like agriculture and in the oil and gas sector must also be implemented. The Nigerian Government has already made efforts in this regard, e.g., under the Nigerian Oil and Gas Industry Content Development Act (known locally as the Local Content Act). More needs to be done to ensure there is greater access for job seekers in varied sectors. The governmentmust also address dif ﬁculties in accessing employment and entrepreneurship opportunities. For instance, age and the level of experience are inhibitors to employment in the Nigerian context. With constant strikes and closures of universities, most Nigerians will spend a longer time in education than their counterparts in other countries. This means that where employers insist on applicants with a long period of experience, such expectations are unrealistic. Government therefore has to step in with policies that can help
such expectations are unrealistic. Government therefore has to step in with policies that can help check that job advertisements do not effectively remove a large number of persons from the potential poolof applicants. There is also a duty on employers who need to adjust their expectations withJEEE 10,3 440
the reality –most university degree holders may be above the cherished ages of 21-24 and may also lack the technical experience gained by their counterparts in countries whereapprenticeships and vocational training are offered as alternatives or alongside university education. Policies addressing the need for constructive apprenticeships even for university degree holders can help address this. Direct assistance for entrepreneurship ventures couldalso be by way of policies which reduce tax and administrative rates and facilitate bank or co-operative loans for new enterprises. Ef ﬁcient public services including power, pipe-borne water, transport, communication and the guaranteed security for lives and businesses arefundamental government support objectives without which the private sector may not beable to grow and develop new ventures as forecast by the participants. Skills and technical competencies : Education curricula must develop not only cognitive but also technical skills that can ease graduates into the job market. Government policiesencouraging social entrepreneurship and supporting youth workshops and projects have to be publicly available especially at school; the results of RA1 suggest that most of the participants had not bene ﬁtting from such programmes is surprising considering the number of such projects identi ﬁed by the government as previously cited ( Essien, 2013 ). Support in the form of funding for apprenticeships and vocational learning out ﬁts in crafts, music, arts, science and technology, could also supplement a university education and mayprovide an alternative means of enterprise for the job seeker. Beyond the component of the degree studies therefore, possessing transferable or social skills which are preferred in a work environment can help overcome barriers to employment. A university education thatincorporates those skills “empowering learners ”will therefore be an additional bene ﬁt (Harvey, 2000 ,p .1 1 ) . /C15Refocusing the NYSC
learners ”will therefore be an additional bene ﬁt (Harvey, 2000 ,p .1 1 ) . /C15Refocusing the NYSC programme as a clear transition from education to work : The NYSC programme has to be revised. The political objective of national unity doesnot address the bigger and more urgent need for skilled workers and entrepreneurs. In addition to providing job placements, the programme can also provide support for innovation and skills training for entrepreneurship activity. It must also provideand make young people aware, of funded entrepreneurship opportunities. /C15Wider education curricula from early years education : A wider curriculum can also facilitate more effectiv e foundational education and engender more purposeful entrepreneurship activity. Educating school- age children about the resources, challenges and needs of the Nigerian environ ment can stimulate the student ’s understanding on how best to capitalise on these resources, at the point of graduate education and beyond. /C15Public and private sector partnership : Other socio-economic measures implied in the participants ’dissatisfaction with the educational system, the lack of infrastructure and lack of support for entrepreneurship, etc. also require attention. This will include direct investment into infrastructure: classroom construction and equipment, stocking libraries, laboratories and research centres. Also, minimisingthe high cost of education with subsidised school fees including transparently funded and well-publicised scholarship opportunities and the provision of learning support for the disabled, juveniles and those with learning dif ﬁculties. Staf ﬁng schools with quali ﬁed teachers, who can manage students ’expectations with regards to job prospects and salary expectations, encourage talent and entrepreneurship, and in addition, ensure that students learn transferable and social skills as part of their curricula even at pre-university level are also required. Otherjoint efforts between the
of their curricula even at pre-university level are also required. Otherjoint efforts between the schools and the private sector can include supportingBarriers to graduate employment 441
schools to invite successful entrepreneurs and career professionals including alumni, to speak to students as role models. /C15Enhanced culture and social attitudes : Graduates have a role to play and an obligation to work towards their own future. Governme nt and the public sector cannot be relied on alone. Expecting high salaries or refusing to take up available employment only meansmore people remain unemployed and the economy suffers to everyone ’sd e t r i m e n t .I n the absence of strong government support for s tart-ups, partnerships and co-operative ventures may also be viable opportunities for business initiatives. Pooling ﬁnances, resources and talents together rather tha n going it alone, may prove of greater bene ﬁt, especially for high capital-intensive oppo rtunities in oil and gas, power supply, etc. There may also be viable opportunities in inventions and innovations, fortelecommunications, health and educational s ervices or to address those business niches existing in the local community. 6.1 Limitations of the study Both RA1 and RA2 were limited in scope to the questionnaires issued and the small sample sizes. Some issues arising from the responses to both surveys were not followed up infurther enquiry and could be the subject of future study. For instance, a more extensivesurvey of graduates to obtain data on employment destinations following the NYSCprogramme can provide more information on the successes and challenges in theprogramme. The study did not explore the impact of issues like gender, learning dif ﬁculties, disability and poverty, on employment and entrepreneurship. Further data and analysis onthese issues could also offer a more comprehensive treatment of the barriers to graduateemployment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria. 7. Conclusion “Without the end-user as a stakeholder, policy responds to the perceived need rather than an actual need ”( European Commission, 2013 , p. 2). The results of the research activities in this study
need ”( European Commission, 2013 , p. 2). The results of the research activities in this study support the initial hypothesis, that is, graduate education is not enough and that thereare barriers to employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria. The results and ﬁndings show that these barriers in order of relevance are: /C15low skills and technical incompetence; /C15poor government policy and investment; /C15poor foundational education; /C15poor transferable skills; /C15lack of creativity and innovation; /C15culture and social attitudes; /C15private sector support; and /C15unrealistic pay expectations. Recommendations that can help efforts at reducing these barriers include: /C15effective government policy and investment; /C15incorporating skills and technical competence in education curricula; /C15refocusing the NYSC programme as a bridge between education and work;JEEE 10,3 442
/C15widening education curricula from early years education; /C15public and private sector partnership; and /C15enhanced cultural and social attitudes. As the results of this study show, a pervasive run of youth unemployment and unsuccessful entrepreneurship ventures for future Nigerian graduates can only be checked by informedand strategic action on tackling the barriers identi ﬁed in this research study. References Akhuemonkhan, I.A., Raimi, L. and Sofoluwe, A.O. (2013), “Entrepreneurship education and employment stimulation in Nigeria ”,Afro-Asian Journal of Social Sciences , Vol. 4 No. 4.1, ISSN 2229-5313. Allais, S. (2012), “Will skills save us? Rethinking the relationships between vocational education, skills development policies, and social policy in South Africa ”,International Journal of Educational Development , Vol. 32 No. 5, pp. 632-642. Alos, A.J. and Bamiro, O.A. (2005), The Pains and Gains of Growth –Case Studies on Entrepreneurship LBS Management Series , Criterion, Lagos. Arthur, S.J., Hisrich, R.D. and Cabrera, Á. (2012), “The importance of education in the entrepreneurial process: a world view ”,Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development , Vol. 19 No. 3, pp. 500-514. Assan, T.B. (2012), “Youth entrepreneurial skills training as a source of employment in the North- Eastern part of Botswana 2 ”,Anthropologist , Vol. 14 No. 6, pp. 517-526. Bates, T. (1995), “Self-employment entry across industry groups ”,Journal of Business Venturing , Vol. 10 No. 2, pp. 143-156. Bruton, G.D., Ahlstrom, D. and Obloj, K. (2008), “Entrepreneurship in emerging economies: where are we today and where the research should go in the future? ”,Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , Vol. 32 No. 1, pp. 1-14. Bryman, A. (2015), Social Research Methods , 5th ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford. Chatham House UK (2014), “Laying the foundations for South Africa ’s future: education for employment and development ”, Africa Programme 23 January 2014, available at: www.
education for employment and development ”, Africa Programme 23 January 2014, available at: www. chathamhouse.org/events/view/196778 (accessed 10 December 2017). Creswell, J.W. (2014), Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative and Mixed Methods Approaches ,4 t h ed., Sage Publications, Los Angeles, CA. Dana, L.P. (2001), “The education and training of entrepreneurs in Asia ”,Education þTraining , Vol. 43 Nos 8/9, pp. 405-416. Demirgüç-Kunt, A. (2011), “Generating jobs in developing countries: a big role for small ﬁrms ”, available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/allabout ﬁnance/generating-jobs-in-devel oping-countries-a-big-role- for-small- ﬁrms(accessed 25 December 2013). Duze, C.O. (2011), “Falling standards of education in Nigeria: an empirical evidence in Delta state of Nigeria ”,LWATI: Journal of Contemporary Research , Vol. 18 No. 3, pp. 1-12. El-Rufai, N.A. (2011), “Why education cannot wait ”,ThisDay Newspapers Nigeria , available at: www. thisdaylive.com/articles/why-education-can-t-wait/95888 (accessed 29 July 2011). Ekebafe, A.O., Nigeria, S. and Joledo, O.A. (2010), “Meeting the human capital requirement of the oil and gas sector in Nigeria ”,Society of Petroleum Engineers –Nigeria Annual International Conference and Exhibition , Vol. 2, pp. 773-782. Ekpoh, U.I. and Eket, A.O. (2011), “Entrepreneurship education and career intentions of tertiary education students in Akwa Ibom and Cross River states, Nigeria ”,International Education Studies , Vol. 4 No. 1, pp. 172-178.Barriers to graduate employment 443
Essien, A. (2013), “Investigating the gains of higher education in African economy and leadership ”,K e y note Address, International Conference on Entrepreneurship and Leadership Robert Gordon University ,Aberdeen May 23-24, 2013. European Commission (2013), “How to engage and empower stakeholders in entrepreneurship education ”, hosted by the Danish Foundation for Entrepreneurship –Young Enterprise , Copenhagen 18-20 Feb 2013, available at: http://ec.europa.eu/transparency/regexpert/index.cfm? do=groupDetail.groupDetailDoc&id=9337&no=2 (accessed 23 February 2015). Federal Government of Nigeria (2013a), “Key statistics –labour market, unemployment ”,National Bureau of Statistics , available at: www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/ (accessed 26 September 2018). Federal Government of Nigeria (2013b), “2013 Budget –consolidated summary 2013 ”, Budget Of ﬁce of the Federation 10 December 2012, available online at: http://budgetof ﬁce.gov.ng/index.php/2013- budget (accessed 26 September 2018). Federal Government of Nigeria (2017), “Key statistics –labour market, unemployment ”,National Bureau of Statistics , available at: www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/ (accessed 26 September 2018). Federal Government of Nigeria (2018), “About NYSC –about the scheme ”,National Youth Service Corps , available at: nysc.gov.ng/aboutscheme.html (accessed 26 September 2018). Global Business School Network (GBSN) (2013), Education, Employment and Entrepreneurship: A Snapshot of the Global Jobs Challenge, report by the GBSN, June 2013. Harvey, L. (2000), “New realities: the relationships between higher education and employment ”, Tertiary Education and Management , Vol. 6 No. 1, pp. 3-17. Igwe, C.N., Adebayo, M.S., Olakanmi, O.A., Ogbonna, I.G. and Aina, O.S. (2013), “Promoting wealth and job creation in Nigeria - review of the role of entrepreneurship ”,Journal of Sustainable Development Studies , Vol. 3 No. 1, pp. 80-100. Ihugba, O.A., Odii, A. and Njoku, A.C. (2013), “Challenges and prospects of
3 No. 1, pp. 80-100. Ihugba, O.A., Odii, A. and Njoku, A.C. (2013), “Challenges and prospects of entrepreneurship in Nigeria ”,Academic Journal of Interdisciplinary Studies , Vol. 2 No. 5, pp. 25-36. Johansen, V. and Clausen, T.H. (2011), “Promoting the entrepreneurs of tomorrow: entrepreneurship education and start-up intentions among schoolchildren ”,International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Small Business , Vol. 13 No. 2, pp. 208-219. Joseph, M.M. (2007), “Education, society and development: some critical issues ”,Sir Arthur Lewis Institute of Social and Economic Studies Conference ,Trinidad and Tobago , 26-28 March 2007. Khayri, S., Yaghoubi, J. and Yazdanpanah, M. (2011), “Investigating barriers to enhance entrepreneurship in agricultural higher education from the perspective of graduate students ”, 3rd World Conference on Educational Sciences, WCES-2011 ,Istanbul , pp. 2818-2822. Kothari, C.R. (2004), Research Methodology: Methods and Techniques , 2nd ed. New Age International Publishers, New Delhi. Lee, J. and Gang, Y. (2010), “Main characteristics of technological entrepreneurship and the impact of governmental policies in Korea ”,International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management , Vol. 12 Nos 3/4, pp. 311-329. Lundahl, M. and Sjöholm, F. (2009), “Population growth and job creation in Timor-Leste ”,Journal of the Asia Paci ﬁc Economy , Vol. 14 No. 1, pp. 90-104. Mahadea, D., Ramroop, S. and Zewotir, T. (2011), “Assessing entrepreneurship perceptions of high school learners in Pietermaritzburg, Kwazulu-Natal ”,South African Journal of Economic and Management Sciences , Vol. 14 No. 1, pp. 66-79. Malaysia, Ministry of Human Resources (2006), “Enhancing jobs strategy ”, available at: www.oecd.org/ employment/employmentpoliciesanddata/37865470.pdf (accessed 25 December 2012). Maxwell, J.A. (2010), “Using numbers in qualitative research ”,Qualitative Inquiry , Vol. 16 No. 6, pp. 475-482.JEEE 10,3 444
Meyer, J.W. (1977), “The effect of education as an institution ”,American Journal of Sociology , Vol. 83 No. 1, pp. 55-77. Mourshed, M., Farrell, D. and Barton, D. (2012), Education to Employment: Designing a System That Works , Mckinsey Centre for Government 2012. Mourshed, M., Patel, J. and Suder, K. (2014), Education to Employment: Getting Europe ’s Youth into Work , Mckinsey Centre for Government 2014. Nelson, J. and O ’Donnell, L. (2012), Approaches to Supporting Young People Not in Education, Employment or Training: A Review , National Foundation for Educational Research (NFER) Research Programme: From Education to Employment, Slough. News Agency of Nigeria (2014), “Two million graduates passed through NYSC since inception – ofﬁcial ”,Premium Times Nigeria (Online), available at: www.premiumtimesng.com/news/ 157214-two-million-graduates-passed-nysc-since-inception-of ﬁcial.html (accessed 26 September 2018). Odia, L.O. and Omofonman, S.I. (2007), “Educational system in Nigeria: Problems and prospects ”, Journal of Social Sciences , Vol. 14 No. 1, pp. 81-86. Owualah, I. (1999), “Banks creation and consultants in Nigeria ’s job program ”,Small Business Economics , Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. 321-330. Playfoot, H. and Hall, R. (2009), “Effective education for employment: a global perspective ”, a report commissioned by Edexcel and prepared by White Loop, April 2009. Robertson, M., Collins, A., Medeira, N. and Slater, J. (2003), “Barriers to start-up and their effect on aspirant entrepreneurs ”,Education þTraining , Vol. 45 No. 6, pp. 308-316. Robinson, P.B. and Sexton, E.A. (1994), “The effect of education and experience on self-employment success ”,Journal of Business Venturing , Vol. 9 No. 2, pp. 141-156. Salami, C.G.E. (2013), “Youth unemployment in Nigeria: a time for creative intervention ”,International Journal of Business and Marketing Management , Vol. 1 No. 2, pp. 18-26. Schoof, U. (2006), “Stimulating youth entrepreneurship: barriers and incentives to enterprise
Schoof, U. (2006), “Stimulating youth entrepreneurship: barriers and incentives to enterprise start-ups by young people ”, ILO Seed Working Paper No 17 –Series on Youth and Entrepreneurship. Silverman, D. (2015), Interpreting Qualitative Data , 5th ed. Sage Publications, London. UNESCO (1991), “The role of higher education on society: quality and pertinence ”,2 n dU N E S C O - N o n Governmental Organisations Collective Consultation on Higher Education, Paris , 8-11 April 1991. Urban, B. and Ratsimanetrimanana, F.A. (2015), “Cultural and entrepreneurial intentions of Madasgan ethnic groups ”,Journal of Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies , Vol. 7 No. 2, pp. 86-114. Uwakah, C.T., Nweze, N.J. and Nwosu, P.C. (1980), “Farmers ’response to ‘operation feed the nation programme ’in Imo and Anambra states of Nigeria ”,Oxford Agrarian Studies , Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 154-168. Wolf, A. (2002), Does Education Matter? Myths about Education and Economic Growth , Penguin, London. Further reading Akinyemi, S., Ofem, I.B. and Ikuenomore, S.O. (2012), “Graduate turnout and graduate employment in Nigeria ”,International Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences , Vol. 2 No. 4, pp. 257-265 . Special Issue July 2012. Aloulou, W.J. (2016), “Predicting entrepreneurial intentions of freshmen students from EAO modeling and personal background: a Saudi perspective ”,Journal of Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies , Vol. 8 No. 2, pp. 180-203. Anyasi, F. and Imoize, L. (2010), “Information technology and the business communities: a case study of small-scale business enterprises in Nigeria ”,Research Journal of Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology , Vol. 2 No. 1, pp. 45-49.Barriers to graduate employment 445
Avramenko, A. (2012), “Enhancing students ’employability through business simulation.2 ”,Education and Training , Vol. 54 No. 5, pp. 355-367. Bennis, W.G. and O ’Toole, J. (2005), “How business schools lost their way ”,Harvard Business Review , Vol. 83 No. 5, pp. 96-104 þ154. Charlot, O. and Malherbet, F. (2013), “Education and employment protection ”,Labour Economics , Vol. 20, pp. 3-23. Federal Government of Nigeria (2010), Nigerian Oil and Gas Industry Content Development Act. Federal Government of Nigeria (2013c), National Data Statistics National Bureau of Statistics, Nigeria. Federal Government of Nigeria (2013d), National Budget Federal Ministry of Finance, Nigeria. Federal Government of Nigeria (2017), National Data Statistics National Bureau of Statistics, Nigeria. Federal Government of Nigeria, National Youth Service Corp, available at: www.nysc.gov.ng/history. php(accessed 17 November 2017). Friedman, M. (1970), “The social responsibility of business is to increase its pro ﬁts”,New York Times Magazine , 13 September 1970. Gardner, J.W. (1995), The Individual and the Innovative Society , W.W Norton, Reissued 1995, New York, NY. Kjelstrom, J.A., Mcdonald, K., Hargadon, A., Agatstein, W. and Arnold, M. (2012), “The university of California, Davis, collaborative model for biotechnology education and training ”,Journal of Commercial Biotechnology , Vol. 18 No. 4, pp. 87-97. Murphy, M. and Dyrenfurth, M.J. (2012), “Examining the role of the university in creating jobs ”, Paper presented at 2012 ASEE Annual Conference and Exposition, San Antonio, TX, available at: https://peer.asee.org/21357 (accessed 11 January 2018). Mustafa, M.J., Hernandez, E., Mahon, C. and Chee, L.K. (2016), “Entrepreneurial intentions of university students in an emerging economy: the in ﬂuence of university support and proactive personality on students ’entrepreneurial intention ”,Journal of Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies , Vol. 8 No. 2, pp. 162-179. Muff, K. (2012), “Are
of Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies , Vol. 8 No. 2, pp. 162-179. Muff, K. (2012), “Are business schools doing their job? ”,Journal of Management Development , Vol. 31 No. 7, pp. 648-662. Ozturk, I. (2001), “The role of education in economic development: a theoretical perspective ”,Journal of Rural Development and Administration , Winter, Vol. 33 No. 1, pp. 39-47,. Papayannakis, L., Kastelli, I., Damigos, D. and Mavrotas, G. (2008), “Fostering entrepreneurship education in engineering curricula in Greece. Experience and challenges for a technical university ”,European Journal of Engineering Education , Vol. 33 No. 2, pp. 199-210. Reyes, C.N. (2016), “Framing the entrepreneurial university: the case of the national university of Singapore ”,Journal of Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies , Vol. 8 No. 2, pp. 134-161. Smith, A. (1776), An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations , Strahan and Cadell, London. Corresponding author Elimma Ezeani can be contacted at: e.ezeani@rgu.ac.uk For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website: www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htmOr contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.comJEEE 10,3 446
Barriers to graduate employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria Elimma Ezeani Aberdeen Business School, Law School, Robert Gordon University, Aberdeen, UK Abstract Purpose –This paper aims to investigate the challenges faced by Nigerian university graduates youths, in ﬁnding suitable employment or in embarking on entrepreneurship ventures. Design/methodology/approach –The research investigates the barriers to graduate employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria starting from the hypothesis that there are other factors besides scarcity of jobs responsible for unemployment in Nigeria. Data from two qualitative research activities were analysed and the results tested, to determine the extent to which the research ﬁndings supported the initial hypothesis. Findings –Theﬁndings con ﬁrm the researcher ’s hypothesis that there are a number of factors, the two main ones being poor government policy and investment in education and low skills and technicalincompetence of graduates, which constitute barriers to employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria. Practical implications –Theﬁndings are clear on the urgency to revisit the Nigerian education and skills curricula and its capacity to facilitate employment and entrepreneurship, and government policy- making in this regard. Originality/value –This study bases its recommendations for addressing Nigeria ’s high graduate unemployment on empirical direct engagement with the primary stakeholder, that is, the Nigerian graduate. Itclearly identi ﬁes that it is not merely scarcity of jobs but a myriad of factors requiring the urgent attention of both public and private sectors that constitute barriers to graduate employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria. Keywords Emerging economies, Graduates, Government, Higher education, Entrepreneurship education, Entry barriers Paper type Research paper 1. Introduction Nigeria has a high number of young people, and is sub-Saharan Africa ’s most populous country. It is, depending on who is
of young people, and is sub-Saharan Africa ’s most populous country. It is, depending on who is speaking, Africa ’s strongest economy, a position, which can be debated, that alternates with South Africa. It has, despite its capacity to diversify, continued a policy of mono-dependency on oil which contributes its largest share of income. The country retains a signi ﬁcantly increasing high rate of unemployment: 23.9 per cent as at January 2012 ( Federal Government of Nigeria, 2013a ) down to a still high 14.2 per cent as at January 2017 ( Federal Government of Nigeria, 2017 ). The relevance of education to future employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria remains relatively under-researched, particularly in terms of exploring what those in or out of education perceive as barriers and challenges. Ihugba et al. (2013 , p. 28), cite, amongst a myriad of factors, “low standard of education ”as one of the “challenges faced by entrepreneurs in developing countries ”. However, an empirical investigation into the career The author wishes to thank Chiamaka Ezeani, MEd Leadership and Management (OU), for her assistance with research data and Mazni MD Yusof, MSc Information and Library Studies (RGU), for initial research assistance on this paper. The author is grateful to Dr Joseph Mante (RGU) for hiscritical review and comments.JEEE 10,3 428 Received 14 February 2017 Revised 17 November 2017 11 January 2018 Accepted 11 January 2018 Journal of Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies Vol. 10 No. 3, 2018 pp. 428-446 © Emerald Publishing Limited 2053-4604DOI 10.1108/JEEE-02-2017-0009The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at: www.emeraldinsight.com/2053-4604.htm
intentions of university students who had bene ﬁted from a semester course in entrepreneurship found that “entrepreneurship education impacts positively on the career intentions of tertiary education students ”(Ekpoh and Eket, 2011 ,p .1 7 6 ) . The researcher ’s hypothesis is that there are a variety of factors responsible for poor employment and entrepreneurship opportunities in Nigeria, not just the scarcity of available jobs and that some of these factors weigh more heavily on a graduate ’s ability to gain employment or engage in entrepreneurship, than others. What was missing from thediscourse and policy planning measures for addressing graduate unemployment and the low level of sustained entrepreneurship activity in Nigeria was a veri ﬁable and validated body of research on the issue. This research aims to ﬁll this gap. First, it engages with the primary stakeholder, that is, the Nigerian university graduate, to assess barriers to employment and entrepreneurship. Second, it identi ﬁes the myriad of factors which are barriers that have been previously identi ﬁed in existing literature and tests the relevance of these factors in the Nigerian context. The results of the research are validated by consultation with other stakeholders including education providers in Nigeria. Fourth, the research results dispel a common myth that scarcity of jobs alone is the reason for highgraduate unemployment in Nigeria and identi ﬁes the urgent need for public –private partnership to address these barriers. The results of the research should be invaluable to drafters of education curricula and policymakers, as it shows what factors need to be tackledif barriers to graduate employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria are to be addressed effectively. To test the aforementioned hypothesis, the research project comprised two research activities: (1) Research Activity 1 on education and youth employment (RA1). (2) Research Activity 2 on education employment and entrepreneurship (RA2).
youth employment (RA1). (2) Research Activity 2 on education employment and entrepreneurship (RA2). The literature review is set out in Section 2. Section 3 presents an overview of the research framework and the methodology adopted for the research. The results and key ﬁndings are presented in Section 4. Section 5 engages in discussion and analysis of the ﬁndings, and Section 6 reviews the implications for research, practice and society and limitations of the study. The conclusions are presented in Section 7. 2. Literature review Given their limited resources, life and work experience, young people face unique constraints and greater barriers than older-age cohorts ( Schoof, 2006 , p. xii). Studies from the USA for example suggests that “[L]evel of education is the most important factor in identifying entrants into skilled services self-employment; probability of entry risessubstantially at each of the higher levels of college education ”(Bates, 1995 , p. 151). Later a UK research notes that the: Typical entrepreneur in the UK is white, male, aged 36 years old and possesses a higher education qualiﬁcation (SBS, 2002) with over 60 per cent of entrepreneurs in the 25-44 years old age bracket. (Robertson et al., 2003 ). A study into the effect of education on employment success again from the USA in the 1990s conﬁrmed that contrary to “the myth of the poorly educated entrepreneur ”(Robinson and Sexton, 1994 , p. 143), “a general education has a strong positive in ﬂuence on entrepreneurship in terms of becoming self-employed and success ”(Robinson and Sexton, 1994, p. 142).Barriers to graduate employment 429
The body of research dealing with entrepreneurship in emerging economies is, on the whole, limited ( Bruton et al. , 2008 ;Urban and Ratsimanetrimanana, 2015 ). However, a review of the literature identi ﬁed two common approaches to solutions for unemployment and support for entrepreneurship. These include the role of government policies andprogrammes and the role of education. 2.1 Role of policies and programmes in promoting entrepreneurship and facilitating employment opportunities Previous studies of resource-rich developing countries with a vibrant youth demographic emphasise the problem of skills shortage and other attendant problems with accessingemployment for young people: Timor-Leste ( Lundahl and Sjöholm, 2009 ) and South Africa (Allais, 2012 ). Similarly in Nigeria where the economy is hugely dependent on oil, the local capacity for jobs or indigenous businesses in the oil industry is also limited by a skills shortage. In a study of the need for human capital in the oil and gas industries in Nigeria, theauthors found that local Nigerian universities are not structured to produce competentgraduates for the oil industry at a time when Nigeria should be exporting technicallycompetent professionals ( Ekebafe et al., 2010 ). A study of Banks Creation and Consultants in Nigeria ’s Job Program suggests that employment creation can be better attained via a partnership of the private and public sectors ( Owualah, 1999 ). Oni (2012) emphasised the vital role of government policies to complement the efforts made by the private sector although in Nigeria ’s case, those policies have not always been successful or sustainable. Most of the programmes were notsustainable owing to poor implementation, ﬁnancing, constant changes in government and other administrative issues. Incidentally, some of the best early (pre 2008) programmes were of little effect; a study on Operation Feed the Nation , which was designed to facilitate agricultural entrepreneurship, showed that --- Feed the Nation , which was designed to facilitate agricultural entrepreneurship, showed that statistically, there were no signi ﬁcant increases in the use of farm input by programme participant and only mild increases in total land areacultivated by farmers ( Uwakah et al.,1 9 8 0 ). Effective government policies to advance entrepreneurship and innovation in SMEs are therefore of importance, not least because young ﬁrms can be productive and can engineer employment ( Demirgüç-Kunt, 2011 ). There is indeed, a role for both public and private partnership in this regard. Such partnership can assist in creating a conducive environment for employment opportunities and entrepreneurship by, for example, narrowing theinformation asymmetry between SMEs and ﬁnancial institutions and encouraging big ﬁrms to support small enterprises ( Igwe et al., 2013 pp. 96-97). Countries, especially those who wish to further stimulate economic growth, need to adopt workable policies but to do so in sectors where they stand to have a market advantage. For instance, technological entrepreneurship has become a source of job creation in Korea. It has been found that high-tech ventures systematically supported by the Korean Governmentachieved a signi ﬁcantly higher level of innovation and job creation than other small ﬁrms ( Lee and Gang, 2010 ). The Malaysian Government has also engaged in the development of biotechnology, nanotechnology, photonics, ICT and advanced manufacturing in the country by providing various training programmes. It also promotes and develops new economic sub-sectors in manufacturing, services and agriculture as a priority in job creation. Hence,job creation has arisen in areas such as environmental management, environmentalengineering, pollution minimization, waste management and R&D. As the new sub-sectorsin the economy have grown, so has the demand for experts and highly skilled professionals (Malaysia, Ministry of Human Resources, 2006 ).JEEE 10,3 430
What advantages does speci ﬁc (sectoral) entrepreneurship education or training offer for entrepreneurship and employment? Assan (2012) conducted a case study in Tutume, north-eastern district of Botswana, to inve stigate whether an entrepreneurial skills training project contributed to greater employment in Botswana. The ﬁndings noted that the vocational training had led to job creation in the Tutume district and contributed toincreased pro ﬁt-making capacity of youth-owned ent erprises. However there were still challenges including: /C15limited domestic market; /C15shortage of subsidies; /C15high production costs; /C15shortage of staff; /C15lack of commitment by some youth entrepreneurs; and /C15low income. The study recommended a refocus on the training towards creativity and innovativethinking, peer assistance, establishment of retail co-operatives and target setting andmonitoring of projects ( Assan, 2012 ). While agriculture is a promising sector for job creation (and the participants in our inquiry agreed), in almost all communities across the world where arable land is availableand there is a young potentially strong workforce, the right support remains crucial to thedevelopment of agricultural entrepreneurial culture among higher education students( Khayri et al.,2 0 1 1 ). The right support can also be successfully used at a younger level, for example, in secondary school. Results from a study carried out in a Norwegian uppersecondary school indicate that entrepreneurship education programmes are able to in ﬂuence entrepreneurial intentions among children with different social backgrounds and at a youngage (Johansen and Clausen, 2011 ). By contrast, a similar study by Mahadea et al. (2011) into South Africa ’s level of early-stage total entrepreneurial activity (TEA) recorded poorer results partly due to skills and resource limitations. However, the study found that ifentrepreneurship education is introduced at the secondary school level, South Africa ’s --- that ifentrepreneurship education is introduced at the secondary school level, South Africa ’s base for entrepreneurial capacity can be enhanced with more skilled young people starting upopportunity ﬁrms and necessity ventures ( Mahadea et al., 2011 ). 2.2 Role of education in promoting employment and entrepreneurship It has been argued that a huge amount of wasteful government spending is attached to misguided and even pernicious policies on education in the misguided belief that morespending in the sector as opposed to vocational training, guarantees economic success( Wolf, 2002 ). Nevertheless, studies on education continually con ﬁrm its importance: /C15early analysis on the effects of education as an institution for society ’s success (Meyer, 1977 ); /C15role of higher education as a stimulus for growth and well-being of the individual in society ( UNESCO, 1991 ); /C15role of education as an essential factor in economic development (Ilhan, 2001); /C15relationship between education, society and development in the Caribbean society (Joseph, 2007 ); and /C15importance of education in the entrepreneurial process ( Arthur et al., 2012 ).Barriers to graduate employment 431
Other projects and studies have examined how effective education is for employment in the global workplace ( Playfoot and Hall (2009) ; the approaches to supporting young people who are not in education (UK) ( Nelson and O ’Donnell, 2012 ); a review of how to support the future of education for employment and development in South Africa ( Chatham House UK, 2014 ); and the limited impact graduate turnout has on graduate employment in Nigeria (Akinyemiet al. , 2014). Surveys on the issues of education and employment by Mckinsey have also examined the factors that inform the design of a suitable system that works to guaranteethat young people can move from education to employment. These factors includeaddressing a critical shortage of skills, impact of violence in society, role of government,families, civil programmes, etc., in the process, and the fact that half of the youths surveyedwere not sure that their post-secondary education had actually improved their chances ofsecuring employment ( Mourshed et al.,2 0 1 2 ). A further Mckinsey study undertook a speci ﬁc focus on how to get Europe ’s high numbers of unemployed youths into employment. The ﬁndings here indicated a number of problems –again the issue of skills shortage, the cost of higher education and the dif ﬁculty young people in this part of the world faced when making the transition from education to employment ( Mourshed et al.,2 0 1 4 ). Most of these studies mentioned considered reports from the International Labour Organisation (ILO), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)and the United Nations Educational Social and Cultural Organisation; the consensus is thatwithout the required skill set, young educated people are no more likely to gain goodemployment easily than their uneducated counterparts can. Entrepreneurship with itsgreater promise of self-employment and in the long term, employment for others and wealthcreation in society is also far-fetched, without appropriate
term, employment for others and wealthcreation in society is also far-fetched, without appropriate vocational or other training andsupport including ﬁnancial support and investment. A report by the Global Business School Network (GBSN) examining the challenges facing the global society identi ﬁed the shortage of employment and entrepreneurship potential, with the latter being ever more crucial tofacilitating employment opportunities in society ( GBSN, 2013 ). Speciﬁc entrepreneurship education has been championed as a necessity for developing countries, but research suggests that the nature of entrepreneurship education matters – transferring “expert ”ideas about entrepreneurship training from one society to another do not necessarily yield success. This has been observed in a study on entrepreneurshipeducation in Asia ( Dana, 2001 ). A similar view is supported in a review of entrepreneurship education and employment in Nigeria ( Akhuemonkhan et al. , 2013 ). In addition, another view holds that an important approach to tackling youth unemployment and challenges toentrepreneurship in Nigeria would be supplementing entrepreneurship education withwork-based training ( Salami, 2013 ). Salami notes that a targeted approach to capitalise on those sectors that hold more attraction for young people such as telecommunications andtechnology, a re-orientation of values that divert youths away from the idea of easy moneyor get-rich quick schemes and a re-engineered approach to agricultural entrepreneurshipwould be bene ﬁcial to such efforts in the Nigerian context ( Salami, 2013 ). 3. Overview of research framework There is an overall need to address youth unemployment and stimulate entrepreneurship activity in emerging economies including in Nigeria. However effective policy-making mustbe based on identi ﬁed barriers which can then be directly targeted in government action and investment, and addressed by educational curricula. Figure 1 shows those factors which the
and investment, and addressed by educational curricula. Figure 1 shows those factors which the researcher believes are essential to employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria.JEEE 10,3 432
3.1 Methodology 3.1.1 Samples and data. The key objective of the research was to determine whether the absence of the factors in Figure 1 are indeed barriers to graduate unemployment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria. The research question sought to ﬁnd out which of these factors were the least or most relevant, from the perspectives of Nigerian graduates themselves. Todo this, the research adopted a qualitative approach ( Bryman, 2015 ;Silverman, 2015 ; Kothari, 2004 ). It relied on numerical data collated from issued surveys in its analysis (Maxwell, 2010 ). Two research activities were carried out. The ﬁrst, Research Activity 1 (RA1), was a random survey of Nigerian graduates on issues related to education and youth employment. A second survey, Research Activity 2 (RA2), on education employment andentrepreneurship was a purposive sampling of 44 participants on an MBA programme at the Lagos Business School, Nigeria. Since the focus of the study is on Nigeria, all the research participants in both surveys were Nigerian graduates only. Participation in both surveys was independent and voluntary. Table I shows an overview of the participants from RA1 (2011) and RA2 (2013). Both activities used prepared questio nnaires designed on the online survey platform, SurveyMonkey. The responses for both surveys were designed to beanonymous, i.e. individual resp onses did not bear the subject ’s identi ﬁcation. The small scope of the research exercise also meant that a qualitative as opposed to a purely quantitative approach which would require larger numbers of research subjects, was more suitable for the study ( Creswell, 2014 , p. 120). 4. Results and key ﬁndings Closed-ended questions allowed for participants to choose preferred options. Following receipt o fr e s p o n s e sf r o me a c hs u r v e y ,t h ed a t aw e r ec o l l a ted electronically to develop a clear picture of the participants ’views. Thereafter the collated data from RA1 and RA2, respectively, wereFigure 1. --- interpreted by evaluating the similarities between the participants ’responses and the initial hypothesis. A comprehensive analysis of the ov erlapping responses was then undertaken with a view to assessing the weight the participants placed on those nine factors essential to graduate employment and entrepreneurship opportunities in Nigeria. Graduate education in Nigeria was the common factor amongst participants in both research activities and de ﬁned the scope of this study. In Figure 1 the researcher ’s hypothesis contemplated that the nine factors highlighted were all relevant to graduate employment and entrepreneurship. From interpretation of the data in both RA1 and RA2,the weight placed on the relevance of each factor varied. From the research ﬁndings, the barriers to graduate employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria have been set out on a simple scale of 0-12, to correspond to their frequency in the participants ’responses. 0 indicates the factor found to be least relevant and 12, the factor most relevant. The results of the research are shown in hierarchical order in Figure 2 . This result shows that the participants corroborated the researcher ’s hypothesis, that there are barriers to employment and entrepreneurship which graduate education alonedoes not address. To test the validity of the above results in Figure 2 , between 2014 and 2015, the views of some of the participants in RA1 and RA2, and other independent reviewers were further consulted for their feedback on the research ﬁndings. These persons were randomly sampled and the results forwarded to them. The independent reviewers ’feedback analysed at least one of the following categories: /C15MBA students not part of the survey; /C15academics and managers in education and training; and /C15self-employed persons, entrepreneurs. Like the participants in both research activities, these persons were Nigerians, in keeping with the approach of the research. The consulted persons agreed with the research
the participants ’views. Thereafter the collated data from RA1 and RA2, respectively, wereFigure 1. Essential factors the absence of which constitute barriers to employment and entrepreneurship Barriers to graduate employment 433
Participants ’overviewResponse rate (%) Participants IdentityAge (years)Completion of NYSC programme (%)Minimum qualificationGender (%) Male:FemaleIdentifies barriers to graduate employment and entrepreneurship? RA1(July-August 2011) 86.2 29 Nigerian 25-40 100 First degree N/A Yes RA2 (May-June 2013) 100 44 Nigerian 20-39 100 First degree 57:43 Yes Source: Data from research activity on education and employment (RA1) and on education, employment and entrepreneurship (RA2) (Ezeani 2017)Table I. Overview of participants in research on barriers to employment and entrepreneurship inNigeriaJEEE 10,3 434 --- Survey findingsNo of participantsGender/ Male:Female ratio (%)Top 3 sectors for entrepreneurshipBottom 3 sectors for entrepreneurshipMain barriers to graduate entrepreneurshipConsidered it difficult to set up a profitable business (%)Minimum proposed qualification foremployment or entrepreneurship RA2 44 57:43 Agriculture; trade andbusiness; oil andgasBanking; education;professionalservicesPoor managementskills93 University degree Source: Data from research activity on education, employment and entrepreneurship (RA2, 2013). (Ezeani, 2017)Table III. Key findings from RA2: education employment and entrepreneurship(RA2, 2013)JEEE 10,3 438
in keeping with the approach of the research. The consulted persons agreed with the research ﬁndings. They however emphasised that the greater responsibility for addressing these barriers lay with the Nigerian government. The feedback received proposed that poor governmentpolicy and investment was not limited to government ’s inability to fund the education sector. It also extended to the inability of the Nigerian Government to provide quality education at all levels from nursery to graduate education, implement policies that support Figure 2. Barriers to graduate employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria02468 1 0 1 2Unrealis/g415c Pay Expecta/g415onsPrivate Sector SupportCulture and Social A/g427tudesLack of Crea/g415vity and Innova/g415onPoor Transferable SkillsPoor Founda/g415onal Educa/g415onPoor Government Policy and InvestmentLow Skills and Technical Incompetence Source:  Results of research on barriers to graduate and employmen t  and entrepreneurship in Nigeria. (Ezeani 2017)Barriers to graduate employment 435 --- producing graduates with the skill sets required foremployment or entrepreneurship opportunities in the sector. Policymakers must alsoexamine and address the sector ’s capacity to absorb Nigerian graduates. The results of both research activities show that there is a concern with the quality of education and skills shortages in Nigeria. There was an almost uniform perception that onlyuniversity education put an applicant ’s capacity to gain employment at an advantage. This view suggests there must be intense competition amongst university graduates for the few available jobs, with non-university degree holders at a distinct disadvantage in theemployment market. It also suggests that there is a dissatisfaction and perhaps a lack ofconﬁdence in post-secondary education similar to the Mckinsey ﬁndings mentioned earlier ( Mourshed et al. , 2012 ,2014). Previous studies have shown that poor infrastructure, poor teaching quality and falling standards are all contributory factors to low-quality educationin Nigeria ( Odia and Omofonman, 2007 ;Duze, 2011 ). Government budgetary allocation has been on the decrease just as constant strikes by school teachers, especially at secondary and university levels, has been persistent. For instance, there has been a severe cut in theeducation budget from its pre-1970 over 40 per cent of the budget allocation, to 8 per cent inthe 1980 ’s and down to its 3 per cent allocation in the 2011 national budget; the actual total was 6 per cent of which 3 per cent was recurrent expenditure ( El-Rufai, 2011 ). In 2013, the Nigerian Government however increased the education allocation to 8 per cent of thenational budget ( Federal Government of Nigeria, 2013b ). This is still too little for quality education. Case studies on entrepreneurship conducted by the RA2 participants ’institution, the Lagos Business School (LBS), had previously found that where founders of businesses“possess managerial capabilities, they may provide enough continuity and
entrepreneurship activities for indigenous entrepreneurs, and reduce dif ﬁculties in accessing available jobs in Nigeria. 4.1 Key ﬁndings from Research Activity 1 (2011) The key ﬁndings from RA1 are shown in Table II . A transition stage from university to the workplace in Nigeria is provided under the National Youth Service Corps (NYSC) programme. Since its creation in 1973, the programme has been compulsory for all Nigerian graduates. However most participants did not want tobe employed in their place of service or were not retained by their employers. This raisesquestions about the effective use of this graduate programme to facilitate employment andentrepreneurship. On questions regarding pay expectations, most of the participantsresponded that they wanted a much higher wage than the average. None of the participantsthought that a monthly income of less than ₦40,000 (c. $230) was a living wage and yet most employers are likely to offer salaries around this amount. 4.2 Key ﬁndings from Research Activity 2 (2013) The key ﬁndings from RA2 are shown in Table III . RA2 sampled the views of MBA students from the Lagos Business School, Lagos (Pan- African University). When asked whether they intended to set up business alone or with another person after their studies, over 79 per cent of the participants ’surveyed answered in the af ﬁrmative, suggesting that there is a real interest in entrepreneurship amongst the participants. The participants did not consider that Nigeria ’s educational system adequately prepared the youth for opportunities in employment and entrepreneurship; indeed only onerespondent agreed with the suggestion. This is an intriguing ﬁnding considering that the participants were all products of the country ’s education system and, in fact, were engaged in studies in a Nigerian institution at the time they were responding to the survey. Commonly accepted challenges amongst the Nigerian populace such as excessive government bureaucracy, competition,
challenges amongst the Nigerian populace such as excessive government bureaucracy, competition, insecurity and even corruption were not considered signiﬁcant barriers to entrepreneurship. Over 90 per cent suggested that entrepreneurship was a better option for the Nigerian graduate in the future and all the participants were ofthe view that the private sector was best suited to support wealth creation in general. 5. Discussion and analysis Because all the research participants had undergone the compulsory NYSC programme, it is useful to provide a brief background on the relevance of the said programme to the researchproject. Starting with about 2,364 graduates in 1973, the NYSC programme has graduatedover 250,000 corp members annually ( News Agency of Nigeria, 2014 ). They were the 38th cohort in a long line of young men and women who having completed higher education and were mandated under Decree No 24, of 22 May 1973, to serve their country with “with a view to the proper encouragement and development of common ties among the youths of Nigeriaand the promotion of national unity ”(Federal Government of Nigeria, 2018 ). Yet in RA1, most participants either did not want to be employed in their place of service or were notretained by their employers under the NYSC programme. Why then does this long-runningexercise in mobility not translate into successes in innovations, entrepreneurship, jobcreation? It is clear both from the low interest in working for the NYSC employer and the apparent disinterest of those graduates surveyed in RA1 in being retained in their NYSC placements,that the NYSC plays a very limited role in bridging the gap between education and employment in Nigeria. This is unfortunate. The focus on national unity in the objectives ofJEEE 10,3 436
Survey findings No of participantsEmployed in NYSC placement (%)Benefitted from NYSC skills programme (%)Top 3 sectors for employmentBottom 3 sectors for employmentMain barrier to graduateemploymentDifficulty getting a job (%)Minimum pay expected/month RA1 29 15 20 Private sector trade and business; banking;educationManufacturing; oil and gas; telecommunicationPoor government policy and investment90 ₦100,000 (c. $575) Source: Data from research activity on education and employment (RA1, 2011)Table II. Key findings from RA1: education and youth employment (RA1, 2011)Barriers to graduate employment 437
the programme is laudable but limiting. The NYSC programme could equally serve more effectively as a transition phase from the school to the work environment. The NYSC remains primarily an exercise in geographical mobility for the Nigerian graduate, and it is not always a pleasant experience. The deaths of Youth corpers caught inthe religious-themed riots in northern Nigeria and the rising Boko Haram insurgency in theearly part of 2013 year are horri ﬁc deterrents to any parent or child thinking of national service. The programme is also narrow in its focus, limiting its engagement with the youth corpers to a year in which it relies wholly on the scarce availability of jobs in the public orprivate sector to offer placements to graduates. As the ﬁndings from RA1 showed, even where support for entrepreneurship schemes was available, not many graduates knew ofthem or had bene ﬁtted from them. From the results in RA1, the three sectors selected as offering the least opportunities for graduate employment were manufacturing, oil and gas and telecommunication. It could be argued that Nigeria may be missing an opportunity in areas of competitive advantage given its young labour force. The participants clearly recognise that these sectors are notaccessible to them. For instance, oil and gas is Nigeria ’s main source of national income yet from the results of the research, graduates are not accessing the sector for jobs andentrepreneurship opportunities. To carry out the work of oil exploration, technicalknowledge, technology and corporate expertise are conditional to the success of oilexploration activities, and all these require human capital whether it is to develop andimplement technical expertise, to implement existing and develop new technology and to facilitate corporate activity and market growth in this area. Nigerian universities must therefore ensure that they are producing graduates with the skill sets required foremployment or entrepreneurship opportunities in
founders of businesses“possess managerial capabilities, they may provide enough continuity and direction in the company ’s transition from birth to growth ”( Alos and Bamiro, 2005 , p. xxvii). The lack of skills was also identi ﬁed as a barrier to entrepreneurship in RA2. The researcher noted that while poor power supply was in the set of options available on this question of barriers toBarriers to graduate employment 439
entrepreneurship, it was placed fourth. It is curious that the participants ignored the importance of power supply without which the ef ﬁciency and success of twenty- ﬁrst- century entrepreneurship ventures is in doubt. On the other hand however, as most homes and businesses in Nigeria rely on generators for their power supply, it could be that the participants were only re ﬂecting the realities of the Nigerian business environment with its persistent absence of stable power supply. The responses to those survey questions evaluating the impact of culture and attitudes on employment and entrepreneurship are also noteworthy. The results in RA1 show that poor government policy and investment are a main barrier to employment. While the participants in RA2 did not place much reliance on the government to create jobs, the participants in RA2 suggested that creating jobs in the society and wealth re-distribution are the two main objectives of wealth creation. Personal satisfaction and making pro ﬁtf o r the enterprise were selected as third and fourth, respectively, on the list of options, an interesting result from the survey. The researcher is aware that there is a social welfare dimension to traditional business culture in Nigeria. Enterprises are mainly family-owned businesses and businesses typically operate a single leadership model structure. There is therefore, in the researcher ’s view, an inconsistency between the actual culture of entrepreneurship in Nigeria and the responses provided by the participants. This is because the two main factors chosen –creating jobs in society and wealth re-distribution –suggest a social altruism at odds with traditional and pragmatic views of wealth creation in the Nigerian society, i.e. to make pro ﬁt and thus provide for the family. As there was no follow-up on the instant research survey, the root of this inconsistency between the participants ’views and commonly held opinion is not clear. It may be owed to “Western ”or --- the participants ’views and commonly held opinion is not clear. It may be owed to “Western ”or academic theories of entrepreneurship and wealth creation which have been studied by the participants in RA2, in the course of their MBA programme. AsDana (2001) andAkhuemonkhan et al. (2013) cited earlier noted, the transfer of ideas on entrepreneurship from one society to the other may not always be ideal. 6. Implications and limitations of studyTheﬁndings are clear on the role of the government and the education system to urgently address the barriers that sti ﬂe employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria. There is also an urgency to revisit the role of the NYSC programme and Nigeria ’s education and skills curricula. The further feedback from those consulted to validate the results and ﬁndings of the research project also highlight the need for targeted policies and more effective government investment. Some recommendations are as follows. Government policy and investment : The Nigerian Government has to invest more in the education sector. Policies encouraging local capacity in economically viable areas like agriculture and in the oil and gas sector must also be implemented. The Nigerian Government has already made efforts in this regard, e.g., under the Nigerian Oil and Gas Industry Content Development Act (known locally as the Local Content Act). More needs to be done to ensure there is greater access for job seekers in varied sectors. The governmentmust also address dif ﬁculties in accessing employment and entrepreneurship opportunities. For instance, age and the level of experience are inhibitors to employment in the Nigerian context. With constant strikes and closures of universities, most Nigerians will spend a longer time in education than their counterparts in other countries. This means that where employers insist on applicants with a long period of experience, such expectations are unrealistic. Government therefore has to step in with policies that can help
such expectations are unrealistic. Government therefore has to step in with policies that can help check that job advertisements do not effectively remove a large number of persons from the potential poolof applicants. There is also a duty on employers who need to adjust their expectations withJEEE 10,3 440 --- of their curricula even at pre-university level are also required. Otherjoint efforts between the schools and the private sector can include supportingBarriers to graduate employment 441 --- need ”( European Commission, 2013 , p. 2). The results of the research activities in this study support the initial hypothesis, that is, graduate education is not enough and that thereare barriers to employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria. The results and ﬁndings show that these barriers in order of relevance are: /C15low skills and technical incompetence; /C15poor government policy and investment; /C15poor foundational education; /C15poor transferable skills; /C15lack of creativity and innovation; /C15culture and social attitudes; /C15private sector support; and /C15unrealistic pay expectations. Recommendations that can help efforts at reducing these barriers include: /C15effective government policy and investment; /C15incorporating skills and technical competence in education curricula; /C15refocusing the NYSC programme as a bridge between education and work;JEEE 10,3 442
the reality –most university degree holders may be above the cherished ages of 21-24 and may also lack the technical experience gained by their counterparts in countries whereapprenticeships and vocational training are offered as alternatives or alongside university education. Policies addressing the need for constructive apprenticeships even for university degree holders can help address this. Direct assistance for entrepreneurship ventures couldalso be by way of policies which reduce tax and administrative rates and facilitate bank or co-operative loans for new enterprises. Ef ﬁcient public services including power, pipe-borne water, transport, communication and the guaranteed security for lives and businesses arefundamental government support objectives without which the private sector may not beable to grow and develop new ventures as forecast by the participants. Skills and technical competencies : Education curricula must develop not only cognitive but also technical skills that can ease graduates into the job market. Government policiesencouraging social entrepreneurship and supporting youth workshops and projects have to be publicly available especially at school; the results of RA1 suggest that most of the participants had not bene ﬁtting from such programmes is surprising considering the number of such projects identi ﬁed by the government as previously cited ( Essien, 2013 ). Support in the form of funding for apprenticeships and vocational learning out ﬁts in crafts, music, arts, science and technology, could also supplement a university education and mayprovide an alternative means of enterprise for the job seeker. Beyond the component of the degree studies therefore, possessing transferable or social skills which are preferred in a work environment can help overcome barriers to employment. A university education thatincorporates those skills “empowering learners ”will therefore be an additional bene ﬁt (Harvey, 2000 ,p .1 1 ) . /C15Refocusing the NYSC
learners ”will therefore be an additional bene ﬁt (Harvey, 2000 ,p .1 1 ) . /C15Refocusing the NYSC programme as a clear transition from education to work : The NYSC programme has to be revised. The political objective of national unity doesnot address the bigger and more urgent need for skilled workers and entrepreneurs. In addition to providing job placements, the programme can also provide support for innovation and skills training for entrepreneurship activity. It must also provideand make young people aware, of funded entrepreneurship opportunities. /C15Wider education curricula from early years education : A wider curriculum can also facilitate more effectiv e foundational education and engender more purposeful entrepreneurship activity. Educating school- age children about the resources, challenges and needs of the Nigerian environ ment can stimulate the student ’s understanding on how best to capitalise on these resources, at the point of graduate education and beyond. /C15Public and private sector partnership : Other socio-economic measures implied in the participants ’dissatisfaction with the educational system, the lack of infrastructure and lack of support for entrepreneurship, etc. also require attention. This will include direct investment into infrastructure: classroom construction and equipment, stocking libraries, laboratories and research centres. Also, minimisingthe high cost of education with subsidised school fees including transparently funded and well-publicised scholarship opportunities and the provision of learning support for the disabled, juveniles and those with learning dif ﬁculties. Staf ﬁng schools with quali ﬁed teachers, who can manage students ’expectations with regards to job prospects and salary expectations, encourage talent and entrepreneurship, and in addition, ensure that students learn transferable and social skills as part of their curricula even at pre-university level are also required. Otherjoint efforts between the
schools to invite successful entrepreneurs and career professionals including alumni, to speak to students as role models. /C15Enhanced culture and social attitudes : Graduates have a role to play and an obligation to work towards their own future. Governme nt and the public sector cannot be relied on alone. Expecting high salaries or refusing to take up available employment only meansmore people remain unemployed and the economy suffers to everyone ’sd e t r i m e n t .I n the absence of strong government support for s tart-ups, partnerships and co-operative ventures may also be viable opportunities for business initiatives. Pooling ﬁnances, resources and talents together rather tha n going it alone, may prove of greater bene ﬁt, especially for high capital-intensive oppo rtunities in oil and gas, power supply, etc. There may also be viable opportunities in inventions and innovations, fortelecommunications, health and educational s ervices or to address those business niches existing in the local community. 6.1 Limitations of the study Both RA1 and RA2 were limited in scope to the questionnaires issued and the small sample sizes. Some issues arising from the responses to both surveys were not followed up infurther enquiry and could be the subject of future study. For instance, a more extensivesurvey of graduates to obtain data on employment destinations following the NYSCprogramme can provide more information on the successes and challenges in theprogramme. The study did not explore the impact of issues like gender, learning dif ﬁculties, disability and poverty, on employment and entrepreneurship. Further data and analysis onthese issues could also offer a more comprehensive treatment of the barriers to graduateemployment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria. 7. Conclusion “Without the end-user as a stakeholder, policy responds to the perceived need rather than an actual need ”( European Commission, 2013 , p. 2). The results of the research activities in this study
/C15widening education curricula from early years education; /C15public and private sector partnership; and /C15enhanced cultural and social attitudes. As the results of this study show, a pervasive run of youth unemployment and unsuccessful entrepreneurship ventures for future Nigerian graduates can only be checked by informedand strategic action on tackling the barriers identi ﬁed in this research study. References Akhuemonkhan, I.A., Raimi, L. and Sofoluwe, A.O. (2013), “Entrepreneurship education and employment stimulation in Nigeria ”,Afro-Asian Journal of Social Sciences , Vol. 4 No. 4.1, ISSN 2229-5313. Allais, S. (2012), “Will skills save us? Rethinking the relationships between vocational education, skills development policies, and social policy in South Africa ”,International Journal of Educational Development , Vol. 32 No. 5, pp. 632-642. Alos, A.J. and Bamiro, O.A. (2005), The Pains and Gains of Growth –Case Studies on Entrepreneurship LBS Management Series , Criterion, Lagos. Arthur, S.J., Hisrich, R.D. and Cabrera, Á. (2012), “The importance of education in the entrepreneurial process: a world view ”,Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development , Vol. 19 No. 3, pp. 500-514. Assan, T.B. (2012), “Youth entrepreneurial skills training as a source of employment in the North- Eastern part of Botswana 2 ”,Anthropologist , Vol. 14 No. 6, pp. 517-526. Bates, T. (1995), “Self-employment entry across industry groups ”,Journal of Business Venturing , Vol. 10 No. 2, pp. 143-156. Bruton, G.D., Ahlstrom, D. and Obloj, K. (2008), “Entrepreneurship in emerging economies: where are we today and where the research should go in the future? ”,Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , Vol. 32 No. 1, pp. 1-14. Bryman, A. (2015), Social Research Methods , 5th ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford. Chatham House UK (2014), “Laying the foundations for South Africa ’s future: education for employment and development ”, Africa Programme 23 January 2014, available at: www.
education for employment and development ”, Africa Programme 23 January 2014, available at: www. chathamhouse.org/events/view/196778 (accessed 10 December 2017). Creswell, J.W. (2014), Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative and Mixed Methods Approaches ,4 t h ed., Sage Publications, Los Angeles, CA. Dana, L.P. (2001), “The education and training of entrepreneurs in Asia ”,Education þTraining , Vol. 43 Nos 8/9, pp. 405-416. Demirgüç-Kunt, A. (2011), “Generating jobs in developing countries: a big role for small ﬁrms ”, available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/allabout ﬁnance/generating-jobs-in-devel oping-countries-a-big-role- for-small- ﬁrms(accessed 25 December 2013). Duze, C.O. (2011), “Falling standards of education in Nigeria: an empirical evidence in Delta state of Nigeria ”,LWATI: Journal of Contemporary Research , Vol. 18 No. 3, pp. 1-12. El-Rufai, N.A. (2011), “Why education cannot wait ”,ThisDay Newspapers Nigeria , available at: www. thisdaylive.com/articles/why-education-can-t-wait/95888 (accessed 29 July 2011). Ekebafe, A.O., Nigeria, S. and Joledo, O.A. (2010), “Meeting the human capital requirement of the oil and gas sector in Nigeria ”,Society of Petroleum Engineers –Nigeria Annual International Conference and Exhibition , Vol. 2, pp. 773-782. Ekpoh, U.I. and Eket, A.O. (2011), “Entrepreneurship education and career intentions of tertiary education students in Akwa Ibom and Cross River states, Nigeria ”,International Education Studies , Vol. 4 No. 1, pp. 172-178.Barriers to graduate employment 443
Essien, A. (2013), “Investigating the gains of higher education in African economy and leadership ”,K e y note Address, International Conference on Entrepreneurship and Leadership Robert Gordon University ,Aberdeen May 23-24, 2013. European Commission (2013), “How to engage and empower stakeholders in entrepreneurship education ”, hosted by the Danish Foundation for Entrepreneurship –Young Enterprise , Copenhagen 18-20 Feb 2013, available at: http://ec.europa.eu/transparency/regexpert/index.cfm? do=groupDetail.groupDetailDoc&id=9337&no=2 (accessed 23 February 2015). Federal Government of Nigeria (2013a), “Key statistics –labour market, unemployment ”,National Bureau of Statistics , available at: www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/ (accessed 26 September 2018). Federal Government of Nigeria (2013b), “2013 Budget –consolidated summary 2013 ”, Budget Of ﬁce of the Federation 10 December 2012, available online at: http://budgetof ﬁce.gov.ng/index.php/2013- budget (accessed 26 September 2018). Federal Government of Nigeria (2017), “Key statistics –labour market, unemployment ”,National Bureau of Statistics , available at: www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/ (accessed 26 September 2018). Federal Government of Nigeria (2018), “About NYSC –about the scheme ”,National Youth Service Corps , available at: nysc.gov.ng/aboutscheme.html (accessed 26 September 2018). Global Business School Network (GBSN) (2013), Education, Employment and Entrepreneurship: A Snapshot of the Global Jobs Challenge, report by the GBSN, June 2013. Harvey, L. (2000), “New realities: the relationships between higher education and employment ”, Tertiary Education and Management , Vol. 6 No. 1, pp. 3-17. Igwe, C.N., Adebayo, M.S., Olakanmi, O.A., Ogbonna, I.G. and Aina, O.S. (2013), “Promoting wealth and job creation in Nigeria - review of the role of entrepreneurship ”,Journal of Sustainable Development Studies , Vol. 3 No. 1, pp. 80-100. Ihugba, O.A., Odii, A. and Njoku, A.C. (2013), “Challenges and prospects of
3 No. 1, pp. 80-100. Ihugba, O.A., Odii, A. and Njoku, A.C. (2013), “Challenges and prospects of entrepreneurship in Nigeria ”,Academic Journal of Interdisciplinary Studies , Vol. 2 No. 5, pp. 25-36. Johansen, V. and Clausen, T.H. (2011), “Promoting the entrepreneurs of tomorrow: entrepreneurship education and start-up intentions among schoolchildren ”,International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Small Business , Vol. 13 No. 2, pp. 208-219. Joseph, M.M. (2007), “Education, society and development: some critical issues ”,Sir Arthur Lewis Institute of Social and Economic Studies Conference ,Trinidad and Tobago , 26-28 March 2007. Khayri, S., Yaghoubi, J. and Yazdanpanah, M. (2011), “Investigating barriers to enhance entrepreneurship in agricultural higher education from the perspective of graduate students ”, 3rd World Conference on Educational Sciences, WCES-2011 ,Istanbul , pp. 2818-2822. Kothari, C.R. (2004), Research Methodology: Methods and Techniques , 2nd ed. New Age International Publishers, New Delhi. Lee, J. and Gang, Y. (2010), “Main characteristics of technological entrepreneurship and the impact of governmental policies in Korea ”,International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management , Vol. 12 Nos 3/4, pp. 311-329. Lundahl, M. and Sjöholm, F. (2009), “Population growth and job creation in Timor-Leste ”,Journal of the Asia Paci ﬁc Economy , Vol. 14 No. 1, pp. 90-104. Mahadea, D., Ramroop, S. and Zewotir, T. (2011), “Assessing entrepreneurship perceptions of high school learners in Pietermaritzburg, Kwazulu-Natal ”,South African Journal of Economic and Management Sciences , Vol. 14 No. 1, pp. 66-79. Malaysia, Ministry of Human Resources (2006), “Enhancing jobs strategy ”, available at: www.oecd.org/ employment/employmentpoliciesanddata/37865470.pdf (accessed 25 December 2012). Maxwell, J.A. (2010), “Using numbers in qualitative research ”,Qualitative Inquiry , Vol. 16 No. 6, pp. 475-482.JEEE 10,3 444
Meyer, J.W. (1977), “The effect of education as an institution ”,American Journal of Sociology , Vol. 83 No. 1, pp. 55-77. Mourshed, M., Farrell, D. and Barton, D. (2012), Education to Employment: Designing a System That Works , Mckinsey Centre for Government 2012. Mourshed, M., Patel, J. and Suder, K. (2014), Education to Employment: Getting Europe ’s Youth into Work , Mckinsey Centre for Government 2014. Nelson, J. and O ’Donnell, L. (2012), Approaches to Supporting Young People Not in Education, Employment or Training: A Review , National Foundation for Educational Research (NFER) Research Programme: From Education to Employment, Slough. News Agency of Nigeria (2014), “Two million graduates passed through NYSC since inception – ofﬁcial ”,Premium Times Nigeria (Online), available at: www.premiumtimesng.com/news/ 157214-two-million-graduates-passed-nysc-since-inception-of ﬁcial.html (accessed 26 September 2018). Odia, L.O. and Omofonman, S.I. (2007), “Educational system in Nigeria: Problems and prospects ”, Journal of Social Sciences , Vol. 14 No. 1, pp. 81-86. Owualah, I. (1999), “Banks creation and consultants in Nigeria ’s job program ”,Small Business Economics , Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. 321-330. Playfoot, H. and Hall, R. (2009), “Effective education for employment: a global perspective ”, a report commissioned by Edexcel and prepared by White Loop, April 2009. Robertson, M., Collins, A., Medeira, N. and Slater, J. (2003), “Barriers to start-up and their effect on aspirant entrepreneurs ”,Education þTraining , Vol. 45 No. 6, pp. 308-316. Robinson, P.B. and Sexton, E.A. (1994), “The effect of education and experience on self-employment success ”,Journal of Business Venturing , Vol. 9 No. 2, pp. 141-156. Salami, C.G.E. (2013), “Youth unemployment in Nigeria: a time for creative intervention ”,International Journal of Business and Marketing Management , Vol. 1 No. 2, pp. 18-26. Schoof, U. (2006), “Stimulating youth entrepreneurship: barriers and incentives to enterprise
Schoof, U. (2006), “Stimulating youth entrepreneurship: barriers and incentives to enterprise start-ups by young people ”, ILO Seed Working Paper No 17 –Series on Youth and Entrepreneurship. Silverman, D. (2015), Interpreting Qualitative Data , 5th ed. Sage Publications, London. UNESCO (1991), “The role of higher education on society: quality and pertinence ”,2 n dU N E S C O - N o n Governmental Organisations Collective Consultation on Higher Education, Paris , 8-11 April 1991. Urban, B. and Ratsimanetrimanana, F.A. (2015), “Cultural and entrepreneurial intentions of Madasgan ethnic groups ”,Journal of Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies , Vol. 7 No. 2, pp. 86-114. Uwakah, C.T., Nweze, N.J. and Nwosu, P.C. (1980), “Farmers ’response to ‘operation feed the nation programme ’in Imo and Anambra states of Nigeria ”,Oxford Agrarian Studies , Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 154-168. Wolf, A. (2002), Does Education Matter? Myths about Education and Economic Growth , Penguin, London. Further reading Akinyemi, S., Ofem, I.B. and Ikuenomore, S.O. (2012), “Graduate turnout and graduate employment in Nigeria ”,International Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences , Vol. 2 No. 4, pp. 257-265 . Special Issue July 2012. Aloulou, W.J. (2016), “Predicting entrepreneurial intentions of freshmen students from EAO modeling and personal background: a Saudi perspective ”,Journal of Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies , Vol. 8 No. 2, pp. 180-203. Anyasi, F. and Imoize, L. (2010), “Information technology and the business communities: a case study of small-scale business enterprises in Nigeria ”,Research Journal of Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology , Vol. 2 No. 1, pp. 45-49.Barriers to graduate employment 445
Avramenko, A. (2012), “Enhancing students ’employability through business simulation.2 ”,Education and Training , Vol. 54 No. 5, pp. 355-367. Bennis, W.G. and O ’Toole, J. (2005), “How business schools lost their way ”,Harvard Business Review , Vol. 83 No. 5, pp. 96-104 þ154. Charlot, O. and Malherbet, F. (2013), “Education and employment protection ”,Labour Economics , Vol. 20, pp. 3-23. Federal Government of Nigeria (2010), Nigerian Oil and Gas Industry Content Development Act. Federal Government of Nigeria (2013c), National Data Statistics National Bureau of Statistics, Nigeria. Federal Government of Nigeria (2013d), National Budget Federal Ministry of Finance, Nigeria. Federal Government of Nigeria (2017), National Data Statistics National Bureau of Statistics, Nigeria. Federal Government of Nigeria, National Youth Service Corp, available at: www.nysc.gov.ng/history. php(accessed 17 November 2017). Friedman, M. (1970), “The social responsibility of business is to increase its pro ﬁts”,New York Times Magazine , 13 September 1970. Gardner, J.W. (1995), The Individual and the Innovative Society , W.W Norton, Reissued 1995, New York, NY. Kjelstrom, J.A., Mcdonald, K., Hargadon, A., Agatstein, W. and Arnold, M. (2012), “The university of California, Davis, collaborative model for biotechnology education and training ”,Journal of Commercial Biotechnology , Vol. 18 No. 4, pp. 87-97. Murphy, M. and Dyrenfurth, M.J. (2012), “Examining the role of the university in creating jobs ”, Paper presented at 2012 ASEE Annual Conference and Exposition, San Antonio, TX, available at: https://peer.asee.org/21357 (accessed 11 January 2018). Mustafa, M.J., Hernandez, E., Mahon, C. and Chee, L.K. (2016), “Entrepreneurial intentions of university students in an emerging economy: the in ﬂuence of university support and proactive personality on students ’entrepreneurial intention ”,Journal of Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies , Vol. 8 No. 2, pp. 162-179. Muff, K. (2012), “Are
of Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies , Vol. 8 No. 2, pp. 162-179. Muff, K. (2012), “Are business schools doing their job? ”,Journal of Management Development , Vol. 31 No. 7, pp. 648-662. Ozturk, I. (2001), “The role of education in economic development: a theoretical perspective ”,Journal of Rural Development and Administration , Winter, Vol. 33 No. 1, pp. 39-47,. Papayannakis, L., Kastelli, I., Damigos, D. and Mavrotas, G. (2008), “Fostering entrepreneurship education in engineering curricula in Greece. Experience and challenges for a technical university ”,European Journal of Engineering Education , Vol. 33 No. 2, pp. 199-210. Reyes, C.N. (2016), “Framing the entrepreneurial university: the case of the national university of Singapore ”,Journal of Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies , Vol. 8 No. 2, pp. 134-161. Smith, A. (1776), An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations , Strahan and Cadell, London. Corresponding author Elimma Ezeani can be contacted at: e.ezeani@rgu.ac.uk For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website: www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htmOr contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.comJEEE 10,3 446
El artículo "Barriers to graduate employment and entrepreneurship in Nigeria" de Elimma Ezeani, publicado en la Aberdeen Business School, examina los obstáculos que enfrentan los jóvenes graduados universitarios en Nigeria al buscar empleo o iniciar negocios. El estudio se propone investigar las barreras que limitan la empleabilidad y el espíritu empresarial, partiendo de la hipótesis de que existen factores más allá de la escasez de empleos que contribuyen al desempleo en el país.

### Metodología
La investigación se basa en dos actividades cualitativas. La primera, una encuesta aleatoria sobre educación y empleo juvenil (RA1), y la segunda, una encuesta intencionada con estudiantes de MBA (RA2). Ambas actividades se centraron en graduados nigerianos, y los datos fueron analizados para evaluar la hipótesis inicial.

### Resultados
Los hallazgos confirman la hipótesis, identificando dos factores principales que obstaculizan la empleabilidad y el emprendimiento:
1. **Políticas gubernamentales deficientes y falta de inversión en educación**: Esto resulta en un sistema educativo que no prepara adecuadamente a los graduados para el mercado laboral.
2. **Baja competencia técnica y habilidades de los graduados**: Muchos graduados carecen de las habilidades necesarias para satisfacer las demandas del mercado laboral.

### Implicaciones Prácticas
Los resultados subrayan la necesidad urgente de revisar los currículos educativos y mejorar las políticas gubernamentales relacionadas con la educación y el empleo. Se concluye que el desempleo no se limita a la escasez de empleos, sino que es el resultado de múltiples factores que requieren atención inmediata.

### Originalidad y Valor
El estudio se distingue por su enfoque empírico directo con los graduados nigerianos, quienes son los principales interesados. Se enfatiza que la problemática del desempleo es compleja y multifacética, lo que requiere un enfoque colaborativo entre el sector público y privado.

### Contexto Socioeconómico
Nigeria, el país más poblado de África subsahariana, enfrenta un alto desempleo juvenil, con tasas que alcanzaron el 23.9% en 2012 y 14.2% en 2017. La dependencia del petróleo y la falta de diversificación económica agravan la situación. La relación entre educación y oportunidades de empleo ha sido poco investigada, especialmente en lo que respecta a las percepciones de los jóvenes.

### Revisión de la Literatura
Se destaca que los jóvenes enfrentan barreras únicas en comparación con cohortes mayores, debido a recursos limitados y falta de experiencia laboral. Se citan estudios que indican que el nivel educativo es crucial para el autoempleo y el éxito empresarial.

### Rol de Políticas y Programas
Se argumenta que las políticas gubernamentales efectivas son cruciales para fomentar el emprendimiento y la innovación en las PYMES. Se presentan ejemplos de países como Corea y Malasia, donde las políticas han estimulado el crecimiento económico a través de la educación y el apoyo a sectores emergentes.

### Educación y Éxito en el Empleo
La investigación resalta la importancia de la educación en el contexto del empleo juvenil y el emprendimiento, sugiriendo que la educación emprendedora tiene un impacto positivo en las aspiraciones profesionales de los estudiantes.

### Conclusiones
El texto concluye que es esencial abordar el desempleo juvenil y estimular la actividad emprendedora en economías emergentes como Nigeria. Se sugiere que la formulación de políticas efectivas debe basarse en la identificación de barreras que puedan ser atacadas directamente mediante acciones gubernamentales y ajustes en los planes de estudio educativos.

### Resumen de la Metodología de Investigación
La investigación se dividió en dos actividades (RA1 y RA2) que involucraron encuestas a graduados nigerianos. Se utilizó un enfoque cualitativo y se analizaron las respuestas para identificar las barreras al empleo y al emprendimiento. Los hallazgos revelaron que la educación de graduados es un factor común, pero la relevancia de cada barrera varía.

### Hallazgos Clave
Los graduados enfrentan barreras significativas en el empleo y el emprendimiento, principalmente relacionadas con la falta de habilidades de gestión y la deficiente política gubernamental. Se identifican expectativas salariales poco realistas y una falta de apoyo del sector privado como obstáculos adicionales.

### Recomendaciones
Se recomienda que el gobierno nigeriano invierta más en educación y desarrolle políticas que fomenten la capacidad local en sectores económicamente viables. También se sugiere revisar el programa del NYSC para que funcione como un puente entre la educación y el trabajo.

### Limitaciones del Estudio
El estudio reconoce que se centró en muestras pequeñas y que algunas cuestiones no fueron investigadas en profundidad, sugiriendo que futuros estudios podrían abordar factores como género y discapacidad en el contexto del empleo y el emprendimiento.

En resumen, el texto destaca la interconexión entre la educación, la inversión y su impacto en el desarrollo del empleo y el emprendimiento en Nigeria, enfatizando la necesidad de un enfoque colaborativo y políticas efectivas para abordar las barreras existentes.
