Transfer of technologies: industry, energy, nanotechnology59 1. Introduction The most common conceptual models of technology  transfer are the so-called pulling [1], pushing [2], and com - bined linear models [3]. The driver of the pulling model is  the demand in the consumer market; in the pushing mod - el – proposals arising from initiative developments; the  combined models integrate both drivers. In the case of a combined model, the organization of the transfer process is  complicated, there is a need for an intermediary, consulting, and management services. The growing complexity of inno - vations not only complicates but also leads to an increase in the cost of their creation and commercialization, which requires external venture funding. There is a target struc - ture of participants in the innovation process, which, taking  into consideration modern innovation and communication  technologies, began to be defined as an innovative ecosys - tem  [4,  5]. One of the consequences of the spread of inno - vative ecosystems was the emergence of a conceptual model of open innovations – the voluntary participation of various  entities in the process of collective creation, commercializa - tion, and the use of innovations [6,  7]. Taking into consideration the variety of forms, methods,  and conditions for entrepreneurial activity, each particular  Copyright © 2022, Authors. This is an open access article under the Creative Commons CC BY licenseHow to Cite: Gontareva, I., Litvinov, O., Hrebennyk, N., Nebaba, N., Litvinova, V., Chimshir, A.  (2022). Improvement of the innovative ecosystem at universities. Eastern-European Journal of Enter - prise Technologies, 1 (13 (115)), 59–68. doi: https://doi.org/10.15587/1729-4061.2022.251799IMPROVEMENT OF  THE INNOVATIVE  ECOSYSTEM AT  UNIVERSITIES Irina Gontareva Corresponding author Doctor  of  Economic  Sciences,  Professor Department  of  Marketing,  Management  and  Entrepreneurship V.N.  Karazin  Kharkiv  National
Department  of  Marketing,  Management  and  Entrepreneurship V.N.  Karazin  Kharkiv  National  University Svobody  sq.,  4,  Kharkiv,  Ukraine,  61022 E-mail:  igontareva@karazin.ua Oleksandr Litvinov Doctor  of  Economic  Sciences,  Associate  Professor,    Vice-Rector  for  Research* Natalia Hrebennyk PhD,  Associate  Professor Center  оf  Knowledge  and  Technology  Transfer* Natalia Nebaba Doctor  of  Economic  Sciences Department  of  International  Economic  Relations    and Regional  Studies University  of  Customs  and  Finance Vernadskoho  str.,  2/4,  Dnipro,  Ukraine,  49000 Viktoriia Litvinova PhD,  Associated  Professor Department  of  Economics  of  Enterprise  and  Entrepreneurship* Anna Chimshir PhD Department  of  General  Scientific  Disciplines Danube  Institute  of  the  National  University    “Odessa  Maritime  Academy” Fanahoriyska  str.,  9,  Izmail,  Ukraine,  68607 *Odessa  National  Economic  University Preobrazhenska  str.,  8,  Odessa,  Ukraine,  65082The world practice has proven that universities  can become a source of innovations and the centers  of innovative movement. However, there is almost  no research into the development of innovative eco- systems of universities under conditions of limit- ed funding and permanent crisis phenomena in the  economy. This is a characteristic feature of many  countries in the world that are developing or being  transformed. The tool for reducing the action of neg- ative factors is to increase the level of organization  of innovative ecosystems of universities. It was found that the consequences of creat- ing an innovative ecosystem of the University are  an increase in the degree of commercialization of  knowledge of university scientists and students,  improvement of human capital, and intensifying  cooperation between science, education, business  and government agencies in the field of research and innovation. The main actors in the universi- ty’s innovation ecosystem were separated and their
and innovation. The main actors in the universi- ty’s innovation ecosystem were separated and their  main functional roles were described. In particular,  functional roles include education  (innovative and  entrepreneurial educational programs), basic sci- ence (scientific parks, scientific and research lab- oratories), applied science  (startup accelerators,  business incubators, startup clubs), and commer-cialization (centers for knowledge and technology transfer). The experience of creating separate ele-ments of innovative ecosystems of universities of the world was considered and positive results were given. The essence of the concepts of commercial-ization of knowledge, technology transfer was stud-ied and basic methodological approaches to the cre-ation of the Center for knowledge and technologies transfer on the university base were explored. The purpose, objectives, directions, and functions of the Center for Knowledge and Technology Transfer  were highlighted. It was proposed to focus on work- ing at specific requests at any stage of the develop-ment of the idea on the principles of the individual approach of targeted assistance, openness to com-munications, and support throughout all stages of an innovative project Keywords: University innovative ecosystem,  commercialization of knowledge, technology trans-fer, startup, innovative activityUDC 330.341.1:378.1 DOI: 10.15587/1729-4061.2022.251799 Received date 07.12.2021  Accepted date 12.02.2022   Published date 28.02.2022
Eastern-European Journal of Enterprise Technologies  ISSN 1729-3774  1/13 ( 115 ) 202260 ecosystem has its own specific characteristics of technology  transfer. However, being an element of the general world and  national ecosystems, the specific features always reflect con - solidated properties and processes. Due to the revolutionary  nature of changes in technologies and/or business models,  enterprises are forced to constantly implement innovations  in their activities. An important role in this is played by the  formation of an innovative environment and the develop - ment of an innovative ecosystem that contribute to the rapid  implementation of scientific developments in the finished  product that is needed by the market. It is generally accepted  in the world to actively involve the university community in  the processes of innovation creation when forming the mech - anisms for the knowledge and technologies transfer [8, 9]. In an interconnected, complementary, and, accordingly, the  synergistic ecosystem at the macro level, this is explained by  the following. Firstly, the field of activity of universities is the  transfer of theoretical knowledge to the practical activities of its  graduates. Secondly, there is an objective competitive need for  a combination of theory and practice in the training of future  specialists. Thirdly, there is a high concentration in universities  of the most experienced and motivated employees. Fourthly,  there is a variety of scientific disciplines, schools, and approach - es that provide a diverse consideration of any innovative object  and process. In general, without the transfer of knowledge,  skills, and abilities, there are no universities, and technologies  transfer is not possible without the knowledge transfer. Universities integrate efforts with business in order not  only to train highly qualified specialists but also to participate  in the preparatory, research, and analytical stages of creating  innovative
also to participate  in the preparatory, research, and analytical stages of creating  innovative products. The innovative ecosystem of the Univer - sity is understood as an environment that is formed directly  by the participants of the innovation process in which there is  their interaction, aimed at creating and developing innovations.  This environment implies joint agreements, specific economic  relations, social contacts, and culture [10, 11]. However, the  issue of imbalance between the urgent needs of business and  the quality of the internal innovation ecosystem of universities,  restrictions on equipment, available human and organizational  resources is acute. Therefore, research into the development of  the innovative ecosystem of universities is relevant. 2. Literature review and problem statement In the broadest sense, the term “innovation ecosystem”  refers to the environment for finding innovations; that is, a  set of conditions that ensure the sustainability of the pro - cesses of appearance, transfer, and commercialization of in - novations in a mutually conditioned socio-economic system.  Article [4] separates three main levels of consideration of the  innovative ecosystem: – business ecosystem – actors (market agents) who  receive economic benefits from participation in innovation  activities;  – communities – groups of people whose interests, abili - ties, and capabilities are close in the way of solving scientific  and technical problems;   – platforms – software and technical complexes and orga - nizational resources that allow coordinating the joint activi - ties of legally independent actors to meet their various needs. However, there remained unresolved issues related to the  study of the content of platforms for the organization of their  functioning within the framework of the innovation ecosystem.Paper [5] proves the importance of platforms as the orga - nizational basis of innovative ecosystems. According to the  researchers [12],
as the orga - nizational basis of innovative ecosystems. According to the  researchers [12], platforms create a network effect: the more  participants use it, the greater value it has for the organizers,  created a community of users, and, in general, for the effec - tiveness of the innovation process. Work [13] emphasizes  that the number of participants in the platform depends on  the degree of its openness, software and technical capabil - ities, rules for connecting and using its resources, the cost  of payment for the services provided. The levels of openness  of the platform are also determined by the desired level of  openness of innovation [14]. Closed innovations (patents,  know-how) make it possible to get a monopoly super profit  but hamper the creation of infrastructure factors for the de - velopment of the sales market. There is a specific innovator  dilemma, which is similar to the one described in paper [15]. Participants in various operations on the ecosystem  platform form relatively stable groups. First of all, these are  owners, organizers of activities, users of various assets, and  others [16]. The subject of the study in the article is the in - novative ecosystems of universities, so special attention will  be paid to the specifics of various groups of university teams  that participate in innovation activities. The university environment should definitely be a sys - temic source of innovation and have some prerequisites for  generating new ideas, creating new products, and transfer - ring knowledge from academic science to the real sector of  the economy. Paper [17] explores the place and impact of  universities in the world on the development of innovations  in the economy. The study of global practices at the level of  universities, corporations, and the state on the commercial - ization of technologies in the early stages of creation was  conducted. Article [18] focuses on the relationship between  creativity in the field of technology
conducted. Article [18] focuses on the relationship between  creativity in the field of technology transfer and the eco - nomic development of the country. In paper [19], the levels  and key factors of knowledge and technology transfer were  highlighted. All this proves that universities become centers  of innovative clusters through active cooperation between  education, science, and business. Universities should act as  providers of new knowledge and skills that will enable them  to develop students’ creativity and readiness for innovations. The world’s leading universities have long been providers of  innovation development in their countries. In 1997, the Univer - sity of Texas introduced a master’s program in technology com - mercialization, which helped launch the spinoff, that is, small  enterprises originating from the university. This experience has  been widely applied in many countries around the world. This is  especially true of polytechnic institutions of higher education,  such as Kyiv, Kharkiv, and Lviv Polytechnic Universities. Even  the concept of an “entrepreneurial university”, an educational  institution that performs a dual function in society, has arisen,  it produces new knowledge and carries out activities for knowl - edge and technologies transfer [21]. In this sense, the issue of formation of an innovative  ecosystem in universities, which is a means of activating all  human capital, bringing it closer to the needs of the market,  and promoting greater innovation and development of so - ciety, is important, including the means of outsourcing ac - tivities in the IT field [22]. Innovative ecosystems and their  management are most often discussed in the context of the  business environment, but not always, the special role of cre - ating an innovative ecosystem in the university environment  is determined. At the same time, there are several advantages  in the formation of such a system on the base of universities:
Transfer of technologies: industry, energy, nanotechnology61 1) the main task of the innovation ecosystem at a universi - ty is not to obtain economic benefits that do not always meet  the needs of a particular society. It is rather to gain access to  knowledge in order to create and exchange innovations and,  ultimately, the development of the economy and society; 2) the existence of collective identity of all participants  in the university innovation ecosystem, due to belonging  to one institution of higher education, in contrast to the  temporary association on the platform of any commercial  incubation structure; 3) approximation to the needs of the economy creates  the possibility of mutual enrichment of educational, research  and innovation-business elements of the university envi - ronment, unlike business structures where the unification  of these three components of the formation of innovative  development is not possible [9]. Thus, the importance and necessity of forming an in - novative ecosystem in universities are undeniable, but the  problems of establishing stable relations between innovative  scientists, university research structures, on the one hand,  and business, on the other hand, remain unresolved. 3. The aim and objectives of the study The aim of this study is to develop a theoretical base for  the development of the innovation ecosystem and to study the  mechanism of its functioning in universities. This will enable  participants of the innovation ecosystem to receive better  communication between innovators and customers of innova - tive products, access to professional advice, the opportunity  to attract venture capital. It will be possible to increase the  degree of commercialization of knowledge of scientists and  students of universities, improving human capital and inten - sifying cooperation between science, education, business, and  government structures in the field of research and innovation. To achieve the set goal, the following
structures in the field of research and innovation. To achieve the set goal, the following tasks were to be  solved: – to identify participants and components of the innova - tion ecosystem in universities;  – to consider the main directions, tasks, and functions  of the Center for Knowledge and Technology Transfer as a  platform for the university’s innovation ecosystem;  – to develop the principles and concepts of the mecha - nism of knowledge and technologies transfer in higher edu - cation institutions. 4. The study materials and methods The object of research is the management of the univer - sity’s innovation ecosystem to intensify the cooperation of  science, education, business, and government structures in  the field of research and innovation. Higher education institutions are the center of research - ers who need to be involved in innovation. This requires  overcoming a number of social, economic, and organizational  barriers. The study proposes to create centers for knowledge  and technologies transfer in universities, which would ag - gregate all the issues of promoting the ideas of scientists in  the real sector of the economy and increase the level of orga - nizational support for knowledge and technologies transfer. The emphasis on the development of the innovation  ecosystem in universities should be placed on organizational issues and the introduction of new methods of open commu - nication in the work of relevant departments. In addition to analyzing and summarizing literary data and  provisions on the theory of innovative ecosystems, official data  of the State Statistics Service of Ukraine, information and ana - lytical materials of the National Technology Transfer Network,  the Institute of Scientific and Technical Information were used  as well. To assess empirical data, reports on the scientific and  technical activities of universities of Ukraine of the AITM  Association, the Ukrainian Startup Fund were applied. Links  to the relevant sites
of the AITM  Association, the Ukrainian Startup Fund were applied. Links  to the relevant sites were provided in the text of the article.  All these data were used as empirical proof and illustration of  conceptual provisions developed by the authors of the article. 5. Results of research into the innovation ecosystem and  the mechanism of its functioning at universities  5. 1. Participants and components of the innovation  ecosystem at universities The theoretical primary sources, as well as practical expe - rience in the development of innovative ecosystems of univer - sities, were analyzed. In particular, the innovative ecosystems  of V. N. Karazin Kharkiv National University, Odesa National  Economic University, Odesa National Maritime University,  and others were explored, and their restrictions were high - lighted. Thus, the main constraints of the development of the  innovation ecosystem in universities include the following: 1) a high level of competition in the educational space at  extremely limited budgetary state funding. This is exacer - bated by a decrease in the population especially now when  the country’s legislation allowed the functioning of branches  of foreign universities in the country. That is why one of the  main conditions for the survival of universities is an innova - tive path of development; 2) a low level of communication between science (uni - versities, research institutes, etc.) and the real sector of the  economy (production, business), which itself is in a difficult  situation. That is why business is not aware of the possibil - ities of university science, scientific research is carried out  without taking into consideration the needs of business,  which significantly reduces the degree of commercializa - tion of knowledge and prevents science and business from  supporting each other. The main prerequisite for the development of the innova - tion ecosystem in universities includes the fact that universities  have a high
of the innova - tion ecosystem in universities includes the fact that universities  have a high concentration of highly qualified researchers who  already are or potentially can become authors of commercially  successful developments and ideas. However, the lack of basic  knowledge about knowledge commercialization and undevel - oped entrepreneurial skills in students and scientists hamper  the introduction of many ideas into the finished product. Formation of the innovative ecosystem at a university  will make it possible:   – to unite people with different sets of competencies in  one space, which will create a synergistic effect and stimu - late innovation;  – to activate the entrepreneurial functions of a higher  education institution;  – to create a specific business environment that is favor - able for the development and implementation of innovations  in the industry and everyday life. Article [10] separated the key parameters for the devel - opment of a successful innovation ecosystem, which include:
Eastern-European Journal of Enterprise Technologies  ISSN 1729-3774  1/13 ( 115 ) 202262 resources, management, strategy, leadership,  organizational culture, human resources, part - ners, technologies, and clustering. Much attention is paid to theoretical issues  of knowledge commercialization, but, as some  experts note, there is more free money than op - portunities to invest in innovation. Firstly, the  higher rate of money circulation in exchange  transactions; secondly, investments in deriv - atives are inherently less risky than venture  capital; thirdly, the volume of venture capital  is declining around the world (Fig. 1). That is why the main task of the devel - opment of the innovation ecosystem in uni - versities and transfer of technologies from  the university environment to the real sec - tor of the economy is exactly the popular - ization of innovation activity among scien - tists and active youth. This is also a difficult  problem to solve around the world because,  among all scientists, university teachers  appeared to be the least motivated to re - ceive funds from economic activity (Fig. 2). In order to provide an innovative vector of  university development and intensify knowl - edge transfer from academic science to the real  sector of the economy, it is proposed to put  universities at the center of the national inno - vation ecosystem. This ecosystem integrates  the following four main components and the  environment (Fig.  3). Consulting agencies are formed under the  influence of a request from the main actors.  The most popular are engineering and de - sign bureaus, experimental laboratories for  prototyping product samples, legal services,  organizational and economic support. These  structures can also be created by university  staff who work at the relevant departments  and have the necessary qualifications. Some  universities create legal clinics, where law stu - dents have the opportunity  to gain practical experience  while studying.
clinics, where law stu - dents have the opportunity  to gain practical experience  while studying. It is neces - sary to initiate the creation  of consulting centers in uni - versities, where students can  provide advice on certain  issues in their specialty un - der the supervision and with  the help of mentor-teachers.  This is one of the ways to in - volve students in knowledge  and technologies transfer  in the dual education sys - tem, that is, a combination  of learning processes and  professional activities. Ac - cording to the dual form of  education, knowledge, and  technology can become the  subject of a tripartite dia - logue between universities,  students, and enterprises.Fig. 1.  Covariance  of world  GDP,  public  and private  investment  [23, 24]-6-4-20246810 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021% Increase in GDP Increase in gross expenditures for R&D Increase in expenditures of private sector for R&D Fig. 2.  Motivation  of scientists  to earn  money  with the help of scientific   research  works  and research  and construction  works  (adapted  from  [25])9,121,0 15,3 5,9 0,05,010,015,020,025,0 Academic SRI Sectoral SRI SRI of universitiesUniversity professors% Fig. 3.  The main  participants  and components  of the innovative  ecosystem  of the UniversityState  institutions Investment  funds  Venture  capital Education   (innovation and  entrepreneurship)  Educational syllabus  at universities Applied science (Start-up  accelerator, business- incubators, startup-clubs)  Basic science   (science facilities, research and  experimental labs)  Commercialization  (Centers of Knowledge  and Technology  Transfer)   Consulting  agenciesUNIVERSITIES  Business  structures  Level of life of  population GDP of the country
Transfer of technologies: industry, energy, nanotechnology63 Another important task of the innovative ecosystem  of universities should be to create platforms for attracting  investment in research developments. Now for a wide range  of small investors, there is a dilemma in choosing the di - rection of investing their own savings and free funds. The  banking sector, due to a significant reduction in interest  rates, has ceased to be attractive for a capital increase, but  only acts as a means of its preserving. That is why so-called  crowdfunds are actively beginning to develop, for which  the main problem, from the point of view of innovation, is  the lack of understanding of promising projects, including  innovative research developments that are ready for financ - ing. For example, good results are shown by the Ukrainian  Startup Fund, which over the past few years has processed  more than 3,000 applications from innovators and financed  more than 190 startups worth more than USD 4.8 million  [26]. However, financing of more or less innovative startups  begins in developed countries with one USD million [27].  So, it is very important to use all resources, including finan - cial ones. Regarding the experience of developing the main  participants in the innovation ecosystem in universities and  their functional roles, it is advisable to pay special attention  to the following: 1. Education. Educational programs of many universities  contain the elements of innovative education, but they need  systematization and updating. Their goal is to raise aware - ness of the issues of innovation and the development of entre - preneurial thinking and culture among students, teachers,  young scientists, and other representatives of the academic  environment. In 2020, at the initiative of the Ministry of Ed - ucation and Science of Ukraine and the Ministry of Digital  Transformation of Ukraine, a pilot project “Entrepreneurial  University”, the purpose of which is to develop
of Ukraine, a pilot project “Entrepreneurial  University”, the purpose of which is to develop the ecosystem  of entrepreneurship in universities of Ukraine, was launched.  According to the results of the 2020 ‒2021 academic year,  76 universities, 170 teachers, and almost 4,500 students  from different universities from all over Ukraine joined the  project [28]. This project has proved to be very effective. It is  developing and new higher education institutions are joining  it in the 2021 ‒2022 academic year. To develop the innovative ecosystem of universities, it  is necessary to expand the introduction of individual disci - plines and specialized educational programs on innovative  entrepreneurship. It is also possible to involve expert practi - tioners in teaching and focus on the development of students’  teamwork skills. This is a very important feature of the de - velopment of innovative projects, where several specialists,  most often of different specialties, are needed. 2. Basic science. Almost every university has a structural  unit that is responsible for scientific activities. However, the  approaches used in these structures do not always meet mod - ern requirements. The activities of scientific departments  must be enhanced. In particular, they should focus on the  following functions: monitoring the global scientific envi - ronment and popularizing scientific activities using modern  methods of information dissemination. Modern science cannot be local. At different universi - ties, scientific research is carried out in the same directions.  There is no doubt that combining the efforts of scientists  from different higher education institutions, even from  different countries, will have a synergistic effect. Therefore,  systematic monitoring of innovations in the scientific area of  the university will reveal scientific trends and provide up-to- date information to the scientific community.It should also be noted that there is a significant sever -
information to the scientific community.It should also be noted that there is a significant sever - ance of relations between university and industry (business).  However, there are good world examples of how to bridge  this gap. In particular, in the United States, the Universi - ty and Industry Demonstration Partnership  (UIDP) was  launched for the first time in 2006, and it is now a unique fo - rum for university and industry representatives to find bet - ter ways to cooperate. This structure at the early stages was  funded by the National Academies of Sciences of the United  States and its main goal is to bring together representatives  of corporations and universities [17]. The UIDP supports mutually beneficial cooperation be - tween universities and industries by developing and spread - ing strategies for resolving common issues between the two  sectors. It is possible to use their experience to determine  intellectual property rights and the mechanism for financing  scientific research. To popularize scientific research, it is necessary to  involve young people, including school students, with the  help of the results of the Mala Academy of Sciences. Un - der today’s conditions, the sources and forms of obtaining  information of young people are different from those that  existed 10 years ago. This must be taken into consideration  in order to develop modern content that is perceived by  modern youth. 3. Applied science. In the world, the main form of  applied innovation is startups, which are provided with  significant organizational and intellectual support based  on universities around the world. The purpose of creating  startup clubs, accelerators, and incubators in universities is  to create the necessary conditions for participants to work  on innovative projects. Specifically, restrictions on the  physical space for meetings with experts, work with men - tors and experts, as well as other events. These structures  contribute to the development of
men - tors and experts, as well as other events. These structures  contribute to the development of entrepreneurial abilities,  popularization, and implementation of the latest methods  of startup acceleration and business incubation. Within  these structures, it is supposed to provide consulting, men - toring, and organizational support to university students,  external students, innovators, and their teams in the imple - mentation of their projects conducting scientific research,  and gaining new knowledge [29]. Based on the needs for economic development around  the world, universities are actively developing the startup  movement. More than 30 universities in Ukraine have  entrepreneurial clubs established with the support of the  NGO Innovation Partnership Platform YEP. According  to this project, clubs are created at the initiative of the  University, and the YEP provides full methodological  and organizational support for the work of clubs. In clubs,  there are meetings with entrepreneurs, discussion of new  ideas and projects, thematic viewings of films and video  lectures. Within the club, students can work on their  startups. In 2018, on the base of Odesa National Economic  University, a regional center for the development of youth  entrepreneurship “Startup University” was created. This is  a social platform for the development of business ideas of  young people, which is designed to assist in the development  and implementation of startup projects in various fields.  Over three years, more than 1,500 students took part in this  project, 7 mentors worked, 47 experts were involved and as a  result, 154 startup projects were developed and presented to  experts and investors [30].
Eastern-European Journal of Enterprise Technologies  ISSN 1729-3774  1/13 ( 115 ) 202264 Such experience needs to be extended and it is necessary  to work towards the commercialization of the results of fun - damental and applied research at universities. 4. Commercialization. The growth of commercial impor - tance of technologies and knowledge requires adequate under - standing of the essence of commercialization of innovations  for the main participants in the innovation ecosystem in  universities, the principles of organizing the Center for the  Transfer of Knowledge and Technologies, the internal logic of  the innovative environment and the mechanism for knowledge  and technologies transfer in higher education institutions, the  regularities of functioning of the innovative infrastructure. 5. 2. Basic directions, tasks, and functions of the Cen - ter for Knowledge and Technology Transfer In works [31 ‒33], a thorough study of the concept of  “technology transfer” was carried out, and definitions given  by different authors in different years in different countries  of the world were presented. It is advisable to dwell only on  certain aspects of this concept. We propose to dwell on the  definition of the Association of University Technology Man - agers [31]. It is proposed to imply by technology transfer the  formal transfer of new knowledge or innovations obtained  as a result of research work in universities and research or - ganizations to the commercial sector for public benefit, the  so-called open innovations. Commercialization of knowledge in universities can be  carried out by creating knowledge and technology transfer  centers [32, 33]. The first centers of technology transfer in  their modern sense emerged in Europe and the United States  in the 1940s and 1950s. The purpose of such centers is to  ensure the commercialization of military technologies and  dual-use technologies by creating on their basis a considerable  range of civilian products. The
dual-use technologies by creating on their basis a considerable  range of civilian products. The wide development of this orga - nizational form took place in the 1980-1990s. with the adop - tion in a number of countries of laws that gave universities the  right to develop, created at the expense of state funding. There are the following kinds of transfer:  – commercial, which involves the transfer of results of  scientific research to the economic sector to obtain a com - mercial benefit;  – non-commercial, which does not imply commercial  benefit and is usually used to transfer results of fundamental  research. This transfer in economically developed countries  takes place with the participation of the state that can com - pensate for the costs of scientific research. Examples of non-profit technology transfer include sci - entists’ publications in specialized journals, providing access  to databases, internships for scientists, participating in exhi - bitions and conferences, patenting, consulting, etc. According to the “Information and Analytical Notes on  the Impact of Technology Transfer Activities” on the web - site of the Ministry of Education and Science in Ukraine  in 2020, only 127 organizations carried out activities in the  field of technology transfer, and 17 of them were higher ed - ucation institutions. In comparison, in 2019, the number of  these organizations was 52, including 21 universities, that is,  almost 2.5 times less, but revenues under technology transfer  contracts were 3 times higher – USD 14.3 million in 2019  against USD 3.7 million in 2020 [34]. Such results indicate  an urgent need to improve technology transfer mechanisms  in Ukraine. The classic scheme of technology transfer in the inno - vation process is the one, which is supposed to provide a technological request from production for the development  of the necessary innovative product, or research. In the op - posite direction, scientific institutions offer a technological
product, or research. In the op - posite direction, scientific institutions offer a technological  proposal (development), which provides the main character - istics of an innovative product. In theory, this scheme looks  reasonable, but in practice, it works differently. According to the results of the study, the success of com - mercialization of scientific development is much higher if it is  performed by request of production. There is an explanation  for this: when a business is in dire need of new technology,  it very quickly introduces it into production. The problem  is that businesses can’t always formulate their needs clearly.  And in the context of a lengthy economic crisis, scientific re - search issues face the need to solve current economic issues. That is why the goal of the Center for knowledge and  technology transfer at the University (Center) is to create  favorable conditions for the development of an innovative  environment in the region.  The following general tasks, functions, and directions of  the Center’s work are offered: – infrastructure: promoting the creation of comfort - able conditions for innovators during their work on proj - ects  (equipment, premises, communications); – consulting: organization of advisory support for inno - vators when working on projects on the issues of expertise,  evaluation, economics, finance, management, law, etc.  (in- cluding the issue of protection of intellectual property).  Legal support, economic calculations, patent research, inno - vation marketing, project design and preparation for presen - tation to investors; – commercialization: assistance to innovators in the  process of commercialization of the results of their scien - tific research. attracting an investor, providing feedback to  promote the growth of the effectiveness of the innovation  process;  – cooperation: establishing mutually beneficial cooper - ation with external and internal stakeholders (researchers,  businessmen, government
cooper - ation with external and internal stakeholders (researchers,  businessmen, government agencies, other educational insti - tutions, etc.); – training: organization of lectures, master classes, work - shops, training and other meetings of innovators and teams  with representatives of the Ukrainian and world innovation  ecosystem, generation of ideas, development of a business  model, ideas’ validation, Customer Development, etc.;  – informing: popularization of innovative activities in  the media, informing all stakeholders about the work of the  Center, involving gifted researchers in innovative activities.  Media and PR information support in the project promotion. The Center can act as a link between innovators and  other stakeholders. 5. 3. Principles and concepts of the mechanism of  knowledge and technologies transfer at higher education  institutions Further development of the transfer mechanism involves  strengthening the impact of market needs on the choice of  problematic issues for research. The result was a different ap - proach to technology transfer, which involved parallel work  of innovators and research into market needs. When constructing a technology transfer mechanism, it is  necessary to take as a basis the principles of startups based on the  Customer Development methodology proposed by Steve Blank  in the 1990s. It involves 100  percent customer orientation and  thrift, that is, spending all types of resources (time, abilities,
Transfer of technologies: industry, energy, nanotechnology65 work, finance) on the development of only the innovations  needed by consumers. The difference between the technology  transfer mechanism and the startup scheme will be: – a wider range of consumers (customers, first of all, will  be business/production, that is, the emphasis on the B2B  segment);   – a lower level of innovation of the proposed technolo - gies  (scientists can fulfill orders to improve existing tech - nologies or optimize business resources);  – smaller production volumes (not mandatory expansion  of business, which is a necessary element of a startup). Taking into consideration the differences highlighted  above, we propose an improved technology transfer mecha - nism, which is shown in Fig. 4. The staff of higher education  institutions, scientific institutions, institutes, laboratories, in - dividual scientists and scientific teams, students, etc. can act  as innovators-developers. Business and govern - ment agencies can order innovative products. The  mechanism considers all stages and forms of com - munication between innovators and businesses,  which should be provided by the Center of knowl - edge and technology transfer of the University. In the context of digitalization, everyone can  get a lot of information on each issue at various  thematic courses, webinars, seminars, conferences  online or offline. The problem lies in the versatility  of most of these proposals, which can be solved by  individualizing consultation and training. Each  specific innovative project or idea requires specific  consultants. This is what we need to pay attention  to while working with innovators. It is necessary to focus on working by spe - cific requests with specific people, teams. It  doesn’t matter at what stage of development the  idea is. Perhaps only at the stage of formulation  of the hypothesis. The project can be considered  by experts in terms of its prospects. The priority  should be
The project can be considered  by experts in terms of its prospects. The priority  should be given to the projects that are carried  out at the request of business.As an example, we can consider the work of the Odesa  Center for Knowledge and Technology Transfer, which was  created within the framework of the project “Development  of the interregional network of technology transfer”, imple - mented jointly by the State Institution “Ukrainian Institute  of Scientific and Technical Expertise and Information” and  Odesa National Economic University. A distinctive feature of  the Center for Transfer of Knowledge and Technologies is that  it includes the Advisory Council on Scientific and Technical  Creativity, headed by the Vice-Rector for Scientific Work  of the University. The Advisory Council contains specialist  deputy deans and representatives: student society, a union of  entrepreneurs of Odessa region, Chamber of Commerce and  Industry, and scientific and technical experts of the Institute. The principles of the Center for knowledge and technol - ogy transfer are shown in Fig. 5. One of the main tasks of the Center at the first stage is to  establish communication between innovators and business - es. To do this, it is necessary  to place special forms on the  site of the Center: 1) for innovators – a form  of innovative proposal, that  is, innovators can place in - formation about their inno - vative proposal at any stage  of work for the general public.  It should be noted that in this  case, we are not talking about  ready-made projects, but  only about the initiative of  researchers who are ready to  work. Here they can demon - strate their scientific interests  and introduce themselves; 2) for business – a form  of innovative request, that  is, a form from businessmen,  in which they indicate to  innovators and scientists a  request for the development  of a scientific, research, or  innovative product. Fig. 4.  Improved  mechanism  for the knowledge  and
scientific, research, or  innovative product. Fig. 4.  Improved  mechanism  for the knowledge  and technologies  transfer  at universitiesDatabase of requests  and proposals of  innovations  Services:  Infrastructure consulting training Expert examining PromotionCENTER OF  KNOWLEDGE AND  TECHNOLOGY  TRANSFER Request for innovative  development  INNIVATORS /  developers CUSTOMERS /  consumers Proposal of innovative  development  1. Request for innovative developmen   2. Providing necessary services to  fulfil a request  1.Agreement on adaptation and  correction by request 2. transfer of information development by requestApplied  research  Experimental  prototype  development Testing Fig. 5.  Principles  of operation  of the Center  for knowledge  and technology  transfer  at universities
Eastern-European Journal of Enterprise Technologies  ISSN 1729-3774  1/13 ( 115 ) 202266 The obtained results on the principles and concept of the  mechanism of transfer of knowledge and technologies make  it possible to create an innovative ecosystem based on higher  education institutions in order to provide opportunities for  establishing a connection between innovators, universities,  and entrepreneurs. As an organizational element of the in - novation ecosystem, it is proposed to create knowledge and  technology transfer centers at universities. 6. Discussion of results of the research into the possibility of  developing an innovative ecosystem at the university In Fig. 3, universities are placed in the center of the  national ecosystem. This corresponds to the practice of  developed countries such as the United States, Germany,  etc. In these countries, national innovation ecosystems  operate under conditions of stable market relations and  added value, which is sufficient for extended reproduction.  That is why the main form of commercialization of tech - nologies for universities is economic contracts with state  and market structures. For developing countries that have  a raw material structure of the economy, the demand for  innovation (especially breakthroughs) is limited. This, on  the one hand, reduces the economic efficiency of innovative  activities of universities. On the other hand, it increases  its socio-educational significance. That is why in Fig. 3  educational function is leading, and Fig. 4 emphasizes the  need for additional services. These include consulting,  expert examination, and infrastructure for supporting  innovation in the business environment. As an element of  the organizational framework for the platform of the inno - vative ecosystem of the University, a permanent advisory  council consisting of representatives of all participants in  the regional innovation ecosystem was used. In turn, this  requires changes in the principles
in  the regional innovation ecosystem was used. In turn, this  requires changes in the principles of the Transfer Center  through the use of open innovations, including on a net - worked digital platform on the Internet. The provided recommendations (Fig.  3–5) on the  development of the innovative ecosystem of universities  are explained by the fact that functional organization is a  component of ensuring the effectiveness of the activities  of any socio-economic system. Based on the functional or - ganization, more economical use of material and financial  resources is possible. In contrast to the existing recom - mendations [32], the focus is on the principles of openness  of communications and attracting students to knowledge  and technologies transfer to business. The main limitation  of the study is the fact that the paper does not consider  the regulatory and institutional support of the process of  organizing an innovative ecosystem in higher education  institutions of Ukraine.The research should be practically used by universities  and the Ministry of Education and Science to intensify in - novation activity and knowledge and technologies transfer.  The theoretical value of the study lies in the development of  a theoretical basis and a mechanism for knowledge and tech - nologies transfer at higher education institutions.  In the future, it is planned to develop proposals for the regu - latory and institutional support of the innovation ecosystem at  the university using the experience of the world’s leading higher  education institutions. 7. Conclusions  1. We established the following main participants and com - ponents of the university’s innovation ecosystem: education,  basic science, applied science, and commercialization of knowl - edge. Much more attention is paid to the educational compo - nent in the structure of the innovation ecosystem: universities  within various educational programs provide the necessary  knowledge of innovation activity and
within various educational programs provide the necessary  knowledge of innovation activity and develop entrepreneurial  skills. Scientific parks function on the base of many universities  and modern research laboratories are created with the help of  business. The emphasis on the development of basic science in  universities should be made on organizational issues and the  introduction of new methods of work of the relevant depart - ments. We supplied practical examples of the development of  the startup movement in universities, which contributes to the  popularization of innovation activities and provides the neces - sary knowledge and resources to university students to create  and expand their startup projects. 2. The most weakly-developed component or the area of ac - tivity in the innovative ecosystem of higher education institu - tions is the issue of commercialization of knowledge. The study  proposes to create centers for knowledge and technologies  transfer at universities that would aggregate all the issues of  promoting the ideas of scientists in the real sector of the econ - omy, creating a bridge from innovators to business. The main  directions, tasks, and functions of the Center for Knowledge  and Technologies Transfer, as well as the principles of work  that meet the goal of developing an innovative ecosystem in  universities, were outlined. 3. The theoretical basis of the mechanism of knowledge  and technologies transfer in higher education institutions  was developed. The staff of higher education institutions,  scientific institutions, individual scientists and scientific  teams, students, etc. act as innovators-developers. Busi - nesses or the state can order innovative products. All stages  and forms of open communication between innovators and  businesses, which should be provided by the Center of  knowledge and technology transfer, were explored in the  mechanism. References  1. Le Grange, L. I., Buys, A. J. (2012). A review of technology
in the  mechanism. References  1. Le Grange, L. I., Buys, A. J. (2012). A review of technology transfer mechanisms. The South African Journal of Industrial  Engineering, 13 (1), 81–99. doi: https://doi.org/10.7166/13-1-320  2. Kundu, N., Bhar, C., Pandurangan, V. (2015). Development of Framework for an Integrated Model for Technology Transfer. Indian  Journal of Science and Technology, 8 (35). doi: https://doi.org/10.17485/ijst/2015/v8i35/74280  3. Rothwell, R. (1991). External networking and innovation in small and medium-sized manufacturing firms in Europe. Technovation,  11 (2), 93–112. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-4972(91)90040-b
Transfer of technologies: industry, energy, nanotechnology674. Barrie, J., Zawdie, G., Jo ão, E. (2019). Assessing the role of triple helix system intermediaries in nurturing an industrial  biotechnology innovation network. Journal of Cleaner Production, 214, 209–223. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/   j.jclepro.2018.12.287  5. Cai, Y., Ma, J., Chen, Q. (2020). Higher Education in Innovation Ecosystems. Sustainability, 12 (11), 4376. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/ su12114376  6. Brasseur, T.-M., Mladenow, A., Strauss, C. (2017). Open business model innovation: Literature review and agenda for future  research. Business Informatics, 4, 7–16. doi: https://doi.org/10.17323/1998-0663.2017.4.7.16  7. Bogers, M., West, J. (2010). Contrasting Innovation Creation and Commercialization within Open, User and Cumulative  Innovation. SSRN Electronic Journal. doi: https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1751025  8. Portuguez Castro, M., Ross Scheede, C., G ómez Zerme ño, M. G. (2019). The Impact of Higher Education on Entrepreneurship  and the Innovation Ecosystem: A Case Study in Mexico. Sustainability, 11 (20), 5597. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/ su11205597  9. Bittencourt, B. A., Carneiro Zen, A., Gazaro Dos Santos, D. A. (2020). Orchestrating University Innovation Ecosystem: The case  of a Brazilian University. Revue internationale d’intelligence economique, Lavoisier, 69–95. Available at: https://hal.archives- ouvertes.fr/hal-02865709/document 10. Durst, S., Poutanen, P. (2013). Success factors of innovation ecosystems: A literature review. CO-CREATE 2013: The Boundary- Crossing Conference on Co-Design in Innovation, 27–38. Available at: https://www.academia.edu/4007245/Success_factors_of_ innovation_ecosystems_A_literature_review 11. Gontareva, I., Borovyk, M., Babenko, V, Perevozova, I., Mokhnenko, A. (2019). Identification of efficiency factors for control over  information and communication provision of sustainable development in higher education institutions. WSEAS Transactions on
provision of sustainable development in higher education institutions. WSEAS Transactions on  Environment and Development, 15, 593–604. Available at: https://www.wseas.org/multimedia/journals/environment/2019/ b245115-062.pdf 12. Kangas, R., Aarrevaara, T. (2020). Higher Education Institutions as Knowledge Brokers in Smart Specialisation. Sustainability, 12 (7),  3044. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/su12073044  13. Thomas, E., Faccin, K., Asheim, B. T. (2020). Universities as orchestrators of the development of regional innovation ecosystems in  emerging economies. Growth and Change, 52 (2), 770–789. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/grow.12442  14. Iglesias-S ánchez, P. P., Jambrino-Maldonado, C., de las Heras-Pedrosa, C. (2019). Training Entrepreneurial Competences with Open  Innovation Paradigm in Higher Education. Sustainability, 11 (17), 4689. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/su11174689  15. Christensen, C. M. (1997). The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail. Boston, MA: Harvard  Business School Press. Available at: https://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Pages/item.aspx?num=46 16. Allen, D. W. E., Potts, J. (2016). How innovation commons contribute to discovering and developing new technologies. International  Journal of the Commons, 10 (2), 1035–1054. doi: https://doi.org/10.18352/ijc.644  17. Kommertsializatsiya tekhnologiy na ranney stadii. Issledovanie global’nyh praktik: Universitety, Korporatsii, Gosudarstvo.  Available at: http://ukros.ru/archives/9803 18. Florida, R. (2014). The Creative Class and Economic Development. Economic Development Quarterly, 28 (3), 196–205. doi:  https://doi.org/10.1177/0891242414541693  19. Cai, Y., Ramis Ferrer, B., Luis Martinez Lastra, J. (2019). Building University-Industry Co-Innovation Networks in Transnational  Innovation Ecosystems: Towards a Transdisciplinary Approach of Integrating Social Sciences and Artificial Intelligence.  Sustainability, 11 (17), 4633. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/su11174633  20.
Intelligence.  Sustainability, 11 (17), 4633. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/su11174633  20. Pattnaik, P. N., Pandey, S. C. (2014). University spinoffs: what, why, and how? Technology Innovation Management Review, 4 (12),  44–50. doi: https://doi.org/10.22215/timreview/857  21. Cruz-Amar án, D., Guerrero, M., Hern ández-Ruiz, A. D. (2020). Changing Times at Cuban Universities: Looking into the Transition  towards a Social, Entrepreneurial and Innovative Organization. Sustainability, 12 (6), 2536. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/ su12062536  22. Pererva, P., Kuchynskyi, V., Kobielieva, T., Kosenko, A., Maslak, O. (2021). Economic substantiation of outsourcing the information  technologies and logistic services in the intellectual and innovative activities of an enterprise. Eastern-European Journal of  Enterprise Technologies, 4 (13 (112)), 6–14. doi: https://doi.org/10.15587/1729-4061.2021.239164  23. Global’niy innovatsionniy indeks 2020 g. Kto budet finansirovat’ innovatsii. Available at: https://www.globalinnovationindex.org/ userfiles/file/reportpdf/GII_2020_KeyFindings_RU_web.pdf 24. Gontareva, I. (2021). Innovative entrepreneurship in conditions of limitations and crisis. Herald of Khmelnytskyi National  University, 1 (5), 185–189. doi: https://doi.org/10.31891/2307-5740-2021-298-5(1)-31  25. Osipov, G. V., Strikhanov, M. N., Sheregi, F. E. (2014). Interaction of science and industry: sociological analysis. Moscow: TSSP i M,  364. Available at: https://5top100.ru/upload/iblock/22f/nauka_proizvodstvo_chast1_2013_chast_1_17_01_14.pdf 26. Ukrainskyi fond startapiv. Available at: https://usf.com.ua/ 27. Kuratko, D. F., Audretsch, D. B. (2021). The future of entrepreneurship: the few or the many? Small Business Economics. doi:  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-021-00534-0
Eastern-European Journal of Enterprise Technologies  ISSN 1729-3774  1/13 ( 115 ) 20226828. Robyty startapy na parakh: YEP i Diya.Biznes zapuskaiut «Pidpryiemnytskyi universytet» u novomu navchalnomu rotsi. Available  at: https://www.kmu.gov.ua/news/robiti-startapi-na-parah-yep-i-diyabiznes-zapuskayut-pidpriyemnickij-universitet-u-novomu- navchalnomu-roci 29. Gontareva, I., Babenko, V., Shmatko, N., Litvinov, O., Obruch, H. (2020). The Model of Network Consulting Communication  at the Early Stages of Entrepreneurship. Wseas Transactions on Environment and Development, 16, 390–396. doi: https:// doi.org/10.37394/232015.2020.16.39  30. Startup University. Available at: http://oneu.edu.ua/ru/startup-university/ 31. About AUTM. Available at: http://www.autm.net/autm-info/ 32. Metodychni rekomendatsiyi shchodo stvorennia ta diyalnosti tsentriv TT. Available at: https://mon.gov.ua/ua/nauka/innovacijna- diyalnist-ta-transfer-tehnologij/metodichni-materiali 33. Ukrainska intehrovana systema transferu tekhnolohiy. Available at: http://untt.com.ua/ua/about/info 34. Informatsiyno-analitychna zapyska shchodo vplyvu diyalnosti u sferi transferu tekhnolohiy na finansovyi stan pidpryiemstv,  ustanov ta orhanizatsiy. Available at: https://mon.gov.ua/storage/app/media/nauka/2021/Transefer.tekhnolohiy/06/23/ Zvit.vplyv.na.finstan.u.2020.rotsi.sayt.MON-23.06.21.pdf
Transfer of technologies: industry, energy, nanotechnology59 1. Introduction The most common conceptual models of technology  transfer are the so-called pulling [1], pushing [2], and com - bined linear models [3]. The driver of the pulling model is  the demand in the consumer market; in the pushing mod - el – proposals arising from initiative developments; the  combined models integrate both drivers. In the case of a combined model, the organization of the transfer process is  complicated, there is a need for an intermediary, consulting, and management services. The growing complexity of inno - vations not only complicates but also leads to an increase in the cost of their creation and commercialization, which requires external venture funding. There is a target struc - ture of participants in the innovation process, which, taking  into consideration modern innovation and communication  technologies, began to be defined as an innovative ecosys - tem  [4,  5]. One of the consequences of the spread of inno - vative ecosystems was the emergence of a conceptual model of open innovations – the voluntary participation of various  entities in the process of collective creation, commercializa - tion, and the use of innovations [6,  7]. Taking into consideration the variety of forms, methods,  and conditions for entrepreneurial activity, each particular  Copyright © 2022, Authors. This is an open access article under the Creative Commons CC BY licenseHow to Cite: Gontareva, I., Litvinov, O., Hrebennyk, N., Nebaba, N., Litvinova, V., Chimshir, A.  (2022). Improvement of the innovative ecosystem at universities. Eastern-European Journal of Enter - prise Technologies, 1 (13 (115)), 59–68. doi: https://doi.org/10.15587/1729-4061.2022.251799IMPROVEMENT OF  THE INNOVATIVE  ECOSYSTEM AT  UNIVERSITIES Irina Gontareva Corresponding author Doctor  of  Economic  Sciences,  Professor Department  of  Marketing,  Management  and  Entrepreneurship V.N.  Karazin  Kharkiv  National --- in the  mechanism. References  1. Le Grange, L. I., Buys, A. J. (2012). A review of technology transfer mechanisms. The South African Journal of Industrial  Engineering, 13 (1), 81–99. doi: https://doi.org/10.7166/13-1-320  2. Kundu, N., Bhar, C., Pandurangan, V. (2015). Development of Framework for an Integrated Model for Technology Transfer. Indian  Journal of Science and Technology, 8 (35). doi: https://doi.org/10.17485/ijst/2015/v8i35/74280  3. Rothwell, R. (1991). External networking and innovation in small and medium-sized manufacturing firms in Europe. Technovation,  11 (2), 93–112. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-4972(91)90040-b
Department  of  Marketing,  Management  and  Entrepreneurship V.N.  Karazin  Kharkiv  National  University Svobody  sq.,  4,  Kharkiv,  Ukraine,  61022 E-mail:  igontareva@karazin.ua Oleksandr Litvinov Doctor  of  Economic  Sciences,  Associate  Professor,    Vice-Rector  for  Research* Natalia Hrebennyk PhD,  Associate  Professor Center  оf  Knowledge  and  Technology  Transfer* Natalia Nebaba Doctor  of  Economic  Sciences Department  of  International  Economic  Relations    and Regional  Studies University  of  Customs  and  Finance Vernadskoho  str.,  2/4,  Dnipro,  Ukraine,  49000 Viktoriia Litvinova PhD,  Associated  Professor Department  of  Economics  of  Enterprise  and  Entrepreneurship* Anna Chimshir PhD Department  of  General  Scientific  Disciplines Danube  Institute  of  the  National  University    “Odessa  Maritime  Academy” Fanahoriyska  str.,  9,  Izmail,  Ukraine,  68607 *Odessa  National  Economic  University Preobrazhenska  str.,  8,  Odessa,  Ukraine,  65082The world practice has proven that universities  can become a source of innovations and the centers  of innovative movement. However, there is almost  no research into the development of innovative eco- systems of universities under conditions of limit- ed funding and permanent crisis phenomena in the  economy. This is a characteristic feature of many  countries in the world that are developing or being  transformed. The tool for reducing the action of neg- ative factors is to increase the level of organization  of innovative ecosystems of universities. It was found that the consequences of creat- ing an innovative ecosystem of the University are  an increase in the degree of commercialization of  knowledge of university scientists and students,  improvement of human capital, and intensifying  cooperation between science, education, business  and government agencies in the field of research and innovation. The main actors in the universi- ty’s innovation ecosystem were separated and their
and innovation. The main actors in the universi- ty’s innovation ecosystem were separated and their  main functional roles were described. In particular,  functional roles include education  (innovative and  entrepreneurial educational programs), basic sci- ence (scientific parks, scientific and research lab- oratories), applied science  (startup accelerators,  business incubators, startup clubs), and commer-cialization (centers for knowledge and technology transfer). The experience of creating separate ele-ments of innovative ecosystems of universities of the world was considered and positive results were given. The essence of the concepts of commercial-ization of knowledge, technology transfer was stud-ied and basic methodological approaches to the cre-ation of the Center for knowledge and technologies transfer on the university base were explored. The purpose, objectives, directions, and functions of the Center for Knowledge and Technology Transfer  were highlighted. It was proposed to focus on work- ing at specific requests at any stage of the develop-ment of the idea on the principles of the individual approach of targeted assistance, openness to com-munications, and support throughout all stages of an innovative project Keywords: University innovative ecosystem,  commercialization of knowledge, technology trans-fer, startup, innovative activityUDC 330.341.1:378.1 DOI: 10.15587/1729-4061.2022.251799 Received date 07.12.2021  Accepted date 12.02.2022   Published date 28.02.2022
Eastern-European Journal of Enterprise Technologies  ISSN 1729-3774  1/13 ( 115 ) 202260 ecosystem has its own specific characteristics of technology  transfer. However, being an element of the general world and  national ecosystems, the specific features always reflect con - solidated properties and processes. Due to the revolutionary  nature of changes in technologies and/or business models,  enterprises are forced to constantly implement innovations  in their activities. An important role in this is played by the  formation of an innovative environment and the develop - ment of an innovative ecosystem that contribute to the rapid  implementation of scientific developments in the finished  product that is needed by the market. It is generally accepted  in the world to actively involve the university community in  the processes of innovation creation when forming the mech - anisms for the knowledge and technologies transfer [8, 9]. In an interconnected, complementary, and, accordingly, the  synergistic ecosystem at the macro level, this is explained by  the following. Firstly, the field of activity of universities is the  transfer of theoretical knowledge to the practical activities of its  graduates. Secondly, there is an objective competitive need for  a combination of theory and practice in the training of future  specialists. Thirdly, there is a high concentration in universities  of the most experienced and motivated employees. Fourthly,  there is a variety of scientific disciplines, schools, and approach - es that provide a diverse consideration of any innovative object  and process. In general, without the transfer of knowledge,  skills, and abilities, there are no universities, and technologies  transfer is not possible without the knowledge transfer. Universities integrate efforts with business in order not  only to train highly qualified specialists but also to participate  in the preparatory, research, and analytical stages of creating  innovative
also to participate  in the preparatory, research, and analytical stages of creating  innovative products. The innovative ecosystem of the Univer - sity is understood as an environment that is formed directly  by the participants of the innovation process in which there is  their interaction, aimed at creating and developing innovations.  This environment implies joint agreements, specific economic  relations, social contacts, and culture [10, 11]. However, the  issue of imbalance between the urgent needs of business and  the quality of the internal innovation ecosystem of universities,  restrictions on equipment, available human and organizational  resources is acute. Therefore, research into the development of  the innovative ecosystem of universities is relevant. 2. Literature review and problem statement In the broadest sense, the term “innovation ecosystem”  refers to the environment for finding innovations; that is, a  set of conditions that ensure the sustainability of the pro - cesses of appearance, transfer, and commercialization of in - novations in a mutually conditioned socio-economic system.  Article [4] separates three main levels of consideration of the  innovative ecosystem: – business ecosystem – actors (market agents) who  receive economic benefits from participation in innovation  activities;  – communities – groups of people whose interests, abili - ties, and capabilities are close in the way of solving scientific  and technical problems;   – platforms – software and technical complexes and orga - nizational resources that allow coordinating the joint activi - ties of legally independent actors to meet their various needs. However, there remained unresolved issues related to the  study of the content of platforms for the organization of their  functioning within the framework of the innovation ecosystem.Paper [5] proves the importance of platforms as the orga - nizational basis of innovative ecosystems. According to the  researchers [12], --- of the innova - tion ecosystem in universities includes the fact that universities  have a high concentration of highly qualified researchers who  already are or potentially can become authors of commercially  successful developments and ideas. However, the lack of basic  knowledge about knowledge commercialization and undevel - oped entrepreneurial skills in students and scientists hamper  the introduction of many ideas into the finished product. Formation of the innovative ecosystem at a university  will make it possible:   – to unite people with different sets of competencies in  one space, which will create a synergistic effect and stimu - late innovation;  – to activate the entrepreneurial functions of a higher  education institution;  – to create a specific business environment that is favor - able for the development and implementation of innovations  in the industry and everyday life. Article [10] separated the key parameters for the devel - opment of a successful innovation ecosystem, which include:
as the orga - nizational basis of innovative ecosystems. According to the  researchers [12], platforms create a network effect: the more  participants use it, the greater value it has for the organizers,  created a community of users, and, in general, for the effec - tiveness of the innovation process. Work [13] emphasizes  that the number of participants in the platform depends on  the degree of its openness, software and technical capabil - ities, rules for connecting and using its resources, the cost  of payment for the services provided. The levels of openness  of the platform are also determined by the desired level of  openness of innovation [14]. Closed innovations (patents,  know-how) make it possible to get a monopoly super profit  but hamper the creation of infrastructure factors for the de - velopment of the sales market. There is a specific innovator  dilemma, which is similar to the one described in paper [15]. Participants in various operations on the ecosystem  platform form relatively stable groups. First of all, these are  owners, organizers of activities, users of various assets, and  others [16]. The subject of the study in the article is the in - novative ecosystems of universities, so special attention will  be paid to the specifics of various groups of university teams  that participate in innovation activities. The university environment should definitely be a sys - temic source of innovation and have some prerequisites for  generating new ideas, creating new products, and transfer - ring knowledge from academic science to the real sector of  the economy. Paper [17] explores the place and impact of  universities in the world on the development of innovations  in the economy. The study of global practices at the level of  universities, corporations, and the state on the commercial - ization of technologies in the early stages of creation was  conducted. Article [18] focuses on the relationship between  creativity in the field of technology
conducted. Article [18] focuses on the relationship between  creativity in the field of technology transfer and the eco - nomic development of the country. In paper [19], the levels  and key factors of knowledge and technology transfer were  highlighted. All this proves that universities become centers  of innovative clusters through active cooperation between  education, science, and business. Universities should act as  providers of new knowledge and skills that will enable them  to develop students’ creativity and readiness for innovations. The world’s leading universities have long been providers of  innovation development in their countries. In 1997, the Univer - sity of Texas introduced a master’s program in technology com - mercialization, which helped launch the spinoff, that is, small  enterprises originating from the university. This experience has  been widely applied in many countries around the world. This is  especially true of polytechnic institutions of higher education,  such as Kyiv, Kharkiv, and Lviv Polytechnic Universities. Even  the concept of an “entrepreneurial university”, an educational  institution that performs a dual function in society, has arisen,  it produces new knowledge and carries out activities for knowl - edge and technologies transfer [21]. In this sense, the issue of formation of an innovative  ecosystem in universities, which is a means of activating all  human capital, bringing it closer to the needs of the market,  and promoting greater innovation and development of so - ciety, is important, including the means of outsourcing ac - tivities in the IT field [22]. Innovative ecosystems and their  management are most often discussed in the context of the  business environment, but not always, the special role of cre - ating an innovative ecosystem in the university environment  is determined. At the same time, there are several advantages  in the formation of such a system on the base of universities:
Transfer of technologies: industry, energy, nanotechnology61 1) the main task of the innovation ecosystem at a universi - ty is not to obtain economic benefits that do not always meet  the needs of a particular society. It is rather to gain access to  knowledge in order to create and exchange innovations and,  ultimately, the development of the economy and society; 2) the existence of collective identity of all participants  in the university innovation ecosystem, due to belonging  to one institution of higher education, in contrast to the  temporary association on the platform of any commercial  incubation structure; 3) approximation to the needs of the economy creates  the possibility of mutual enrichment of educational, research  and innovation-business elements of the university envi - ronment, unlike business structures where the unification  of these three components of the formation of innovative  development is not possible [9]. Thus, the importance and necessity of forming an in - novative ecosystem in universities are undeniable, but the  problems of establishing stable relations between innovative  scientists, university research structures, on the one hand,  and business, on the other hand, remain unresolved. 3. The aim and objectives of the study The aim of this study is to develop a theoretical base for  the development of the innovation ecosystem and to study the  mechanism of its functioning in universities. This will enable  participants of the innovation ecosystem to receive better  communication between innovators and customers of innova - tive products, access to professional advice, the opportunity  to attract venture capital. It will be possible to increase the  degree of commercialization of knowledge of scientists and  students of universities, improving human capital and inten - sifying cooperation between science, education, business, and  government structures in the field of research and innovation. To achieve the set goal, the following
structures in the field of research and innovation. To achieve the set goal, the following tasks were to be  solved: – to identify participants and components of the innova - tion ecosystem in universities;  – to consider the main directions, tasks, and functions  of the Center for Knowledge and Technology Transfer as a  platform for the university’s innovation ecosystem;  – to develop the principles and concepts of the mecha - nism of knowledge and technologies transfer in higher edu - cation institutions. 4. The study materials and methods The object of research is the management of the univer - sity’s innovation ecosystem to intensify the cooperation of  science, education, business, and government structures in  the field of research and innovation. Higher education institutions are the center of research - ers who need to be involved in innovation. This requires  overcoming a number of social, economic, and organizational  barriers. The study proposes to create centers for knowledge  and technologies transfer in universities, which would ag - gregate all the issues of promoting the ideas of scientists in  the real sector of the economy and increase the level of orga - nizational support for knowledge and technologies transfer. The emphasis on the development of the innovation  ecosystem in universities should be placed on organizational issues and the introduction of new methods of open commu - nication in the work of relevant departments. In addition to analyzing and summarizing literary data and  provisions on the theory of innovative ecosystems, official data  of the State Statistics Service of Ukraine, information and ana - lytical materials of the National Technology Transfer Network,  the Institute of Scientific and Technical Information were used  as well. To assess empirical data, reports on the scientific and  technical activities of universities of Ukraine of the AITM  Association, the Ukrainian Startup Fund were applied. Links  to the relevant sites
of the AITM  Association, the Ukrainian Startup Fund were applied. Links  to the relevant sites were provided in the text of the article.  All these data were used as empirical proof and illustration of  conceptual provisions developed by the authors of the article. 5. Results of research into the innovation ecosystem and  the mechanism of its functioning at universities  5. 1. Participants and components of the innovation  ecosystem at universities The theoretical primary sources, as well as practical expe - rience in the development of innovative ecosystems of univer - sities, were analyzed. In particular, the innovative ecosystems  of V. N. Karazin Kharkiv National University, Odesa National  Economic University, Odesa National Maritime University,  and others were explored, and their restrictions were high - lighted. Thus, the main constraints of the development of the  innovation ecosystem in universities include the following: 1) a high level of competition in the educational space at  extremely limited budgetary state funding. This is exacer - bated by a decrease in the population especially now when  the country’s legislation allowed the functioning of branches  of foreign universities in the country. That is why one of the  main conditions for the survival of universities is an innova - tive path of development; 2) a low level of communication between science (uni - versities, research institutes, etc.) and the real sector of the  economy (production, business), which itself is in a difficult  situation. That is why business is not aware of the possibil - ities of university science, scientific research is carried out  without taking into consideration the needs of business,  which significantly reduces the degree of commercializa - tion of knowledge and prevents science and business from  supporting each other. The main prerequisite for the development of the innova - tion ecosystem in universities includes the fact that universities  have a high
Eastern-European Journal of Enterprise Technologies  ISSN 1729-3774  1/13 ( 115 ) 202262 resources, management, strategy, leadership,  organizational culture, human resources, part - ners, technologies, and clustering. Much attention is paid to theoretical issues  of knowledge commercialization, but, as some  experts note, there is more free money than op - portunities to invest in innovation. Firstly, the  higher rate of money circulation in exchange  transactions; secondly, investments in deriv - atives are inherently less risky than venture  capital; thirdly, the volume of venture capital  is declining around the world (Fig. 1). That is why the main task of the devel - opment of the innovation ecosystem in uni - versities and transfer of technologies from  the university environment to the real sec - tor of the economy is exactly the popular - ization of innovation activity among scien - tists and active youth. This is also a difficult  problem to solve around the world because,  among all scientists, university teachers  appeared to be the least motivated to re - ceive funds from economic activity (Fig. 2). In order to provide an innovative vector of  university development and intensify knowl - edge transfer from academic science to the real  sector of the economy, it is proposed to put  universities at the center of the national inno - vation ecosystem. This ecosystem integrates  the following four main components and the  environment (Fig.  3). Consulting agencies are formed under the  influence of a request from the main actors.  The most popular are engineering and de - sign bureaus, experimental laboratories for  prototyping product samples, legal services,  organizational and economic support. These  structures can also be created by university  staff who work at the relevant departments  and have the necessary qualifications. Some  universities create legal clinics, where law stu - dents have the opportunity  to gain practical experience  while studying.
clinics, where law stu - dents have the opportunity  to gain practical experience  while studying. It is neces - sary to initiate the creation  of consulting centers in uni - versities, where students can  provide advice on certain  issues in their specialty un - der the supervision and with  the help of mentor-teachers.  This is one of the ways to in - volve students in knowledge  and technologies transfer  in the dual education sys - tem, that is, a combination  of learning processes and  professional activities. Ac - cording to the dual form of  education, knowledge, and  technology can become the  subject of a tripartite dia - logue between universities,  students, and enterprises.Fig. 1.  Covariance  of world  GDP,  public  and private  investment  [23, 24]-6-4-20246810 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021% Increase in GDP Increase in gross expenditures for R&D Increase in expenditures of private sector for R&D Fig. 2.  Motivation  of scientists  to earn  money  with the help of scientific   research  works  and research  and construction  works  (adapted  from  [25])9,121,0 15,3 5,9 0,05,010,015,020,025,0 Academic SRI Sectoral SRI SRI of universitiesUniversity professors% Fig. 3.  The main  participants  and components  of the innovative  ecosystem  of the UniversityState  institutions Investment  funds  Venture  capital Education   (innovation and  entrepreneurship)  Educational syllabus  at universities Applied science (Start-up  accelerator, business- incubators, startup-clubs)  Basic science   (science facilities, research and  experimental labs)  Commercialization  (Centers of Knowledge  and Technology  Transfer)   Consulting  agenciesUNIVERSITIES  Business  structures  Level of life of  population GDP of the country
Transfer of technologies: industry, energy, nanotechnology63 Another important task of the innovative ecosystem  of universities should be to create platforms for attracting  investment in research developments. Now for a wide range  of small investors, there is a dilemma in choosing the di - rection of investing their own savings and free funds. The  banking sector, due to a significant reduction in interest  rates, has ceased to be attractive for a capital increase, but  only acts as a means of its preserving. That is why so-called  crowdfunds are actively beginning to develop, for which  the main problem, from the point of view of innovation, is  the lack of understanding of promising projects, including  innovative research developments that are ready for financ - ing. For example, good results are shown by the Ukrainian  Startup Fund, which over the past few years has processed  more than 3,000 applications from innovators and financed  more than 190 startups worth more than USD 4.8 million  [26]. However, financing of more or less innovative startups  begins in developed countries with one USD million [27].  So, it is very important to use all resources, including finan - cial ones. Regarding the experience of developing the main  participants in the innovation ecosystem in universities and  their functional roles, it is advisable to pay special attention  to the following: 1. Education. Educational programs of many universities  contain the elements of innovative education, but they need  systematization and updating. Their goal is to raise aware - ness of the issues of innovation and the development of entre - preneurial thinking and culture among students, teachers,  young scientists, and other representatives of the academic  environment. In 2020, at the initiative of the Ministry of Ed - ucation and Science of Ukraine and the Ministry of Digital  Transformation of Ukraine, a pilot project “Entrepreneurial  University”, the purpose of which is to develop
of Ukraine, a pilot project “Entrepreneurial  University”, the purpose of which is to develop the ecosystem  of entrepreneurship in universities of Ukraine, was launched.  According to the results of the 2020 ‒2021 academic year,  76 universities, 170 teachers, and almost 4,500 students  from different universities from all over Ukraine joined the  project [28]. This project has proved to be very effective. It is  developing and new higher education institutions are joining  it in the 2021 ‒2022 academic year. To develop the innovative ecosystem of universities, it  is necessary to expand the introduction of individual disci - plines and specialized educational programs on innovative  entrepreneurship. It is also possible to involve expert practi - tioners in teaching and focus on the development of students’  teamwork skills. This is a very important feature of the de - velopment of innovative projects, where several specialists,  most often of different specialties, are needed. 2. Basic science. Almost every university has a structural  unit that is responsible for scientific activities. However, the  approaches used in these structures do not always meet mod - ern requirements. The activities of scientific departments  must be enhanced. In particular, they should focus on the  following functions: monitoring the global scientific envi - ronment and popularizing scientific activities using modern  methods of information dissemination. Modern science cannot be local. At different universi - ties, scientific research is carried out in the same directions.  There is no doubt that combining the efforts of scientists  from different higher education institutions, even from  different countries, will have a synergistic effect. Therefore,  systematic monitoring of innovations in the scientific area of  the university will reveal scientific trends and provide up-to- date information to the scientific community.It should also be noted that there is a significant sever -
information to the scientific community.It should also be noted that there is a significant sever - ance of relations between university and industry (business).  However, there are good world examples of how to bridge  this gap. In particular, in the United States, the Universi - ty and Industry Demonstration Partnership  (UIDP) was  launched for the first time in 2006, and it is now a unique fo - rum for university and industry representatives to find bet - ter ways to cooperate. This structure at the early stages was  funded by the National Academies of Sciences of the United  States and its main goal is to bring together representatives  of corporations and universities [17]. The UIDP supports mutually beneficial cooperation be - tween universities and industries by developing and spread - ing strategies for resolving common issues between the two  sectors. It is possible to use their experience to determine  intellectual property rights and the mechanism for financing  scientific research. To popularize scientific research, it is necessary to  involve young people, including school students, with the  help of the results of the Mala Academy of Sciences. Un - der today’s conditions, the sources and forms of obtaining  information of young people are different from those that  existed 10 years ago. This must be taken into consideration  in order to develop modern content that is perceived by  modern youth. 3. Applied science. In the world, the main form of  applied innovation is startups, which are provided with  significant organizational and intellectual support based  on universities around the world. The purpose of creating  startup clubs, accelerators, and incubators in universities is  to create the necessary conditions for participants to work  on innovative projects. Specifically, restrictions on the  physical space for meetings with experts, work with men - tors and experts, as well as other events. These structures  contribute to the development of
men - tors and experts, as well as other events. These structures  contribute to the development of entrepreneurial abilities,  popularization, and implementation of the latest methods  of startup acceleration and business incubation. Within  these structures, it is supposed to provide consulting, men - toring, and organizational support to university students,  external students, innovators, and their teams in the imple - mentation of their projects conducting scientific research,  and gaining new knowledge [29]. Based on the needs for economic development around  the world, universities are actively developing the startup  movement. More than 30 universities in Ukraine have  entrepreneurial clubs established with the support of the  NGO Innovation Partnership Platform YEP. According  to this project, clubs are created at the initiative of the  University, and the YEP provides full methodological  and organizational support for the work of clubs. In clubs,  there are meetings with entrepreneurs, discussion of new  ideas and projects, thematic viewings of films and video  lectures. Within the club, students can work on their  startups. In 2018, on the base of Odesa National Economic  University, a regional center for the development of youth  entrepreneurship “Startup University” was created. This is  a social platform for the development of business ideas of  young people, which is designed to assist in the development  and implementation of startup projects in various fields.  Over three years, more than 1,500 students took part in this  project, 7 mentors worked, 47 experts were involved and as a  result, 154 startup projects were developed and presented to  experts and investors [30].
Eastern-European Journal of Enterprise Technologies  ISSN 1729-3774  1/13 ( 115 ) 202264 Such experience needs to be extended and it is necessary  to work towards the commercialization of the results of fun - damental and applied research at universities. 4. Commercialization. The growth of commercial impor - tance of technologies and knowledge requires adequate under - standing of the essence of commercialization of innovations  for the main participants in the innovation ecosystem in  universities, the principles of organizing the Center for the  Transfer of Knowledge and Technologies, the internal logic of  the innovative environment and the mechanism for knowledge  and technologies transfer in higher education institutions, the  regularities of functioning of the innovative infrastructure. 5. 2. Basic directions, tasks, and functions of the Cen - ter for Knowledge and Technology Transfer In works [31 ‒33], a thorough study of the concept of  “technology transfer” was carried out, and definitions given  by different authors in different years in different countries  of the world were presented. It is advisable to dwell only on  certain aspects of this concept. We propose to dwell on the  definition of the Association of University Technology Man - agers [31]. It is proposed to imply by technology transfer the  formal transfer of new knowledge or innovations obtained  as a result of research work in universities and research or - ganizations to the commercial sector for public benefit, the  so-called open innovations. Commercialization of knowledge in universities can be  carried out by creating knowledge and technology transfer  centers [32, 33]. The first centers of technology transfer in  their modern sense emerged in Europe and the United States  in the 1940s and 1950s. The purpose of such centers is to  ensure the commercialization of military technologies and  dual-use technologies by creating on their basis a considerable  range of civilian products. The
dual-use technologies by creating on their basis a considerable  range of civilian products. The wide development of this orga - nizational form took place in the 1980-1990s. with the adop - tion in a number of countries of laws that gave universities the  right to develop, created at the expense of state funding. There are the following kinds of transfer:  – commercial, which involves the transfer of results of  scientific research to the economic sector to obtain a com - mercial benefit;  – non-commercial, which does not imply commercial  benefit and is usually used to transfer results of fundamental  research. This transfer in economically developed countries  takes place with the participation of the state that can com - pensate for the costs of scientific research. Examples of non-profit technology transfer include sci - entists’ publications in specialized journals, providing access  to databases, internships for scientists, participating in exhi - bitions and conferences, patenting, consulting, etc. According to the “Information and Analytical Notes on  the Impact of Technology Transfer Activities” on the web - site of the Ministry of Education and Science in Ukraine  in 2020, only 127 organizations carried out activities in the  field of technology transfer, and 17 of them were higher ed - ucation institutions. In comparison, in 2019, the number of  these organizations was 52, including 21 universities, that is,  almost 2.5 times less, but revenues under technology transfer  contracts were 3 times higher – USD 14.3 million in 2019  against USD 3.7 million in 2020 [34]. Such results indicate  an urgent need to improve technology transfer mechanisms  in Ukraine. The classic scheme of technology transfer in the inno - vation process is the one, which is supposed to provide a technological request from production for the development  of the necessary innovative product, or research. In the op - posite direction, scientific institutions offer a technological
product, or research. In the op - posite direction, scientific institutions offer a technological  proposal (development), which provides the main character - istics of an innovative product. In theory, this scheme looks  reasonable, but in practice, it works differently. According to the results of the study, the success of com - mercialization of scientific development is much higher if it is  performed by request of production. There is an explanation  for this: when a business is in dire need of new technology,  it very quickly introduces it into production. The problem  is that businesses can’t always formulate their needs clearly.  And in the context of a lengthy economic crisis, scientific re - search issues face the need to solve current economic issues. That is why the goal of the Center for knowledge and  technology transfer at the University (Center) is to create  favorable conditions for the development of an innovative  environment in the region.  The following general tasks, functions, and directions of  the Center’s work are offered: – infrastructure: promoting the creation of comfort - able conditions for innovators during their work on proj - ects  (equipment, premises, communications); – consulting: organization of advisory support for inno - vators when working on projects on the issues of expertise,  evaluation, economics, finance, management, law, etc.  (in- cluding the issue of protection of intellectual property).  Legal support, economic calculations, patent research, inno - vation marketing, project design and preparation for presen - tation to investors; – commercialization: assistance to innovators in the  process of commercialization of the results of their scien - tific research. attracting an investor, providing feedback to  promote the growth of the effectiveness of the innovation  process;  – cooperation: establishing mutually beneficial cooper - ation with external and internal stakeholders (researchers,  businessmen, government
cooper - ation with external and internal stakeholders (researchers,  businessmen, government agencies, other educational insti - tutions, etc.); – training: organization of lectures, master classes, work - shops, training and other meetings of innovators and teams  with representatives of the Ukrainian and world innovation  ecosystem, generation of ideas, development of a business  model, ideas’ validation, Customer Development, etc.;  – informing: popularization of innovative activities in  the media, informing all stakeholders about the work of the  Center, involving gifted researchers in innovative activities.  Media and PR information support in the project promotion. The Center can act as a link between innovators and  other stakeholders. 5. 3. Principles and concepts of the mechanism of  knowledge and technologies transfer at higher education  institutions Further development of the transfer mechanism involves  strengthening the impact of market needs on the choice of  problematic issues for research. The result was a different ap - proach to technology transfer, which involved parallel work  of innovators and research into market needs. When constructing a technology transfer mechanism, it is  necessary to take as a basis the principles of startups based on the  Customer Development methodology proposed by Steve Blank  in the 1990s. It involves 100  percent customer orientation and  thrift, that is, spending all types of resources (time, abilities, --- The project can be considered  by experts in terms of its prospects. The priority  should be given to the projects that are carried  out at the request of business.As an example, we can consider the work of the Odesa  Center for Knowledge and Technology Transfer, which was  created within the framework of the project “Development  of the interregional network of technology transfer”, imple - mented jointly by the State Institution “Ukrainian Institute  of Scientific and Technical Expertise and Information” and  Odesa National Economic University. A distinctive feature of  the Center for Transfer of Knowledge and Technologies is that  it includes the Advisory Council on Scientific and Technical  Creativity, headed by the Vice-Rector for Scientific Work  of the University. The Advisory Council contains specialist  deputy deans and representatives: student society, a union of  entrepreneurs of Odessa region, Chamber of Commerce and  Industry, and scientific and technical experts of the Institute. The principles of the Center for knowledge and technol - ogy transfer are shown in Fig. 5. One of the main tasks of the Center at the first stage is to  establish communication between innovators and business - es. To do this, it is necessary  to place special forms on the  site of the Center: 1) for innovators – a form  of innovative proposal, that  is, innovators can place in - formation about their inno - vative proposal at any stage  of work for the general public.  It should be noted that in this  case, we are not talking about  ready-made projects, but  only about the initiative of  researchers who are ready to  work. Here they can demon - strate their scientific interests  and introduce themselves; 2) for business – a form  of innovative request, that  is, a form from businessmen,  in which they indicate to  innovators and scientists a  request for the development  of a scientific, research, or  innovative product. Fig. 4.  Improved  mechanism  for the knowledge  and
Transfer of technologies: industry, energy, nanotechnology65 work, finance) on the development of only the innovations  needed by consumers. The difference between the technology  transfer mechanism and the startup scheme will be: – a wider range of consumers (customers, first of all, will  be business/production, that is, the emphasis on the B2B  segment);   – a lower level of innovation of the proposed technolo - gies  (scientists can fulfill orders to improve existing tech - nologies or optimize business resources);  – smaller production volumes (not mandatory expansion  of business, which is a necessary element of a startup). Taking into consideration the differences highlighted  above, we propose an improved technology transfer mecha - nism, which is shown in Fig. 4. The staff of higher education  institutions, scientific institutions, institutes, laboratories, in - dividual scientists and scientific teams, students, etc. can act  as innovators-developers. Business and govern - ment agencies can order innovative products. The  mechanism considers all stages and forms of com - munication between innovators and businesses,  which should be provided by the Center of knowl - edge and technology transfer of the University. In the context of digitalization, everyone can  get a lot of information on each issue at various  thematic courses, webinars, seminars, conferences  online or offline. The problem lies in the versatility  of most of these proposals, which can be solved by  individualizing consultation and training. Each  specific innovative project or idea requires specific  consultants. This is what we need to pay attention  to while working with innovators. It is necessary to focus on working by spe - cific requests with specific people, teams. It  doesn’t matter at what stage of development the  idea is. Perhaps only at the stage of formulation  of the hypothesis. The project can be considered  by experts in terms of its prospects. The priority  should be
scientific, research, or  innovative product. Fig. 4.  Improved  mechanism  for the knowledge  and technologies  transfer  at universitiesDatabase of requests  and proposals of  innovations  Services:  Infrastructure consulting training Expert examining PromotionCENTER OF  KNOWLEDGE AND  TECHNOLOGY  TRANSFER Request for innovative  development  INNIVATORS /  developers CUSTOMERS /  consumers Proposal of innovative  development  1. Request for innovative developmen   2. Providing necessary services to  fulfil a request  1.Agreement on adaptation and  correction by request 2. transfer of information development by requestApplied  research  Experimental  prototype  development Testing Fig. 5.  Principles  of operation  of the Center  for knowledge  and technology  transfer  at universities
Eastern-European Journal of Enterprise Technologies  ISSN 1729-3774  1/13 ( 115 ) 202266 The obtained results on the principles and concept of the  mechanism of transfer of knowledge and technologies make  it possible to create an innovative ecosystem based on higher  education institutions in order to provide opportunities for  establishing a connection between innovators, universities,  and entrepreneurs. As an organizational element of the in - novation ecosystem, it is proposed to create knowledge and  technology transfer centers at universities. 6. Discussion of results of the research into the possibility of  developing an innovative ecosystem at the university In Fig. 3, universities are placed in the center of the  national ecosystem. This corresponds to the practice of  developed countries such as the United States, Germany,  etc. In these countries, national innovation ecosystems  operate under conditions of stable market relations and  added value, which is sufficient for extended reproduction.  That is why the main form of commercialization of tech - nologies for universities is economic contracts with state  and market structures. For developing countries that have  a raw material structure of the economy, the demand for  innovation (especially breakthroughs) is limited. This, on  the one hand, reduces the economic efficiency of innovative  activities of universities. On the other hand, it increases  its socio-educational significance. That is why in Fig. 3  educational function is leading, and Fig. 4 emphasizes the  need for additional services. These include consulting,  expert examination, and infrastructure for supporting  innovation in the business environment. As an element of  the organizational framework for the platform of the inno - vative ecosystem of the University, a permanent advisory  council consisting of representatives of all participants in  the regional innovation ecosystem was used. In turn, this  requires changes in the principles
in  the regional innovation ecosystem was used. In turn, this  requires changes in the principles of the Transfer Center  through the use of open innovations, including on a net - worked digital platform on the Internet. The provided recommendations (Fig.  3–5) on the  development of the innovative ecosystem of universities  are explained by the fact that functional organization is a  component of ensuring the effectiveness of the activities  of any socio-economic system. Based on the functional or - ganization, more economical use of material and financial  resources is possible. In contrast to the existing recom - mendations [32], the focus is on the principles of openness  of communications and attracting students to knowledge  and technologies transfer to business. The main limitation  of the study is the fact that the paper does not consider  the regulatory and institutional support of the process of  organizing an innovative ecosystem in higher education  institutions of Ukraine.The research should be practically used by universities  and the Ministry of Education and Science to intensify in - novation activity and knowledge and technologies transfer.  The theoretical value of the study lies in the development of  a theoretical basis and a mechanism for knowledge and tech - nologies transfer at higher education institutions.  In the future, it is planned to develop proposals for the regu - latory and institutional support of the innovation ecosystem at  the university using the experience of the world’s leading higher  education institutions. 7. Conclusions  1. We established the following main participants and com - ponents of the university’s innovation ecosystem: education,  basic science, applied science, and commercialization of knowl - edge. Much more attention is paid to the educational compo - nent in the structure of the innovation ecosystem: universities  within various educational programs provide the necessary  knowledge of innovation activity and
within various educational programs provide the necessary  knowledge of innovation activity and develop entrepreneurial  skills. Scientific parks function on the base of many universities  and modern research laboratories are created with the help of  business. The emphasis on the development of basic science in  universities should be made on organizational issues and the  introduction of new methods of work of the relevant depart - ments. We supplied practical examples of the development of  the startup movement in universities, which contributes to the  popularization of innovation activities and provides the neces - sary knowledge and resources to university students to create  and expand their startup projects. 2. The most weakly-developed component or the area of ac - tivity in the innovative ecosystem of higher education institu - tions is the issue of commercialization of knowledge. The study  proposes to create centers for knowledge and technologies  transfer at universities that would aggregate all the issues of  promoting the ideas of scientists in the real sector of the econ - omy, creating a bridge from innovators to business. The main  directions, tasks, and functions of the Center for Knowledge  and Technologies Transfer, as well as the principles of work  that meet the goal of developing an innovative ecosystem in  universities, were outlined. 3. The theoretical basis of the mechanism of knowledge  and technologies transfer in higher education institutions  was developed. The staff of higher education institutions,  scientific institutions, individual scientists and scientific  teams, students, etc. act as innovators-developers. Busi - nesses or the state can order innovative products. All stages  and forms of open communication between innovators and  businesses, which should be provided by the Center of  knowledge and technology transfer, were explored in the  mechanism. References  1. Le Grange, L. I., Buys, A. J. (2012). A review of technology
Transfer of technologies: industry, energy, nanotechnology674. Barrie, J., Zawdie, G., Jo ão, E. (2019). Assessing the role of triple helix system intermediaries in nurturing an industrial  biotechnology innovation network. Journal of Cleaner Production, 214, 209–223. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/   j.jclepro.2018.12.287  5. Cai, Y., Ma, J., Chen, Q. (2020). Higher Education in Innovation Ecosystems. Sustainability, 12 (11), 4376. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/ su12114376  6. Brasseur, T.-M., Mladenow, A., Strauss, C. (2017). Open business model innovation: Literature review and agenda for future  research. Business Informatics, 4, 7–16. doi: https://doi.org/10.17323/1998-0663.2017.4.7.16  7. Bogers, M., West, J. (2010). Contrasting Innovation Creation and Commercialization within Open, User and Cumulative  Innovation. SSRN Electronic Journal. doi: https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1751025  8. Portuguez Castro, M., Ross Scheede, C., G ómez Zerme ño, M. G. (2019). The Impact of Higher Education on Entrepreneurship  and the Innovation Ecosystem: A Case Study in Mexico. Sustainability, 11 (20), 5597. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/ su11205597  9. Bittencourt, B. A., Carneiro Zen, A., Gazaro Dos Santos, D. A. (2020). Orchestrating University Innovation Ecosystem: The case  of a Brazilian University. Revue internationale d’intelligence economique, Lavoisier, 69–95. Available at: https://hal.archives- ouvertes.fr/hal-02865709/document 10. Durst, S., Poutanen, P. (2013). Success factors of innovation ecosystems: A literature review. CO-CREATE 2013: The Boundary- Crossing Conference on Co-Design in Innovation, 27–38. Available at: https://www.academia.edu/4007245/Success_factors_of_ innovation_ecosystems_A_literature_review 11. Gontareva, I., Borovyk, M., Babenko, V, Perevozova, I., Mokhnenko, A. (2019). Identification of efficiency factors for control over  information and communication provision of sustainable development in higher education institutions. WSEAS Transactions on
provision of sustainable development in higher education institutions. WSEAS Transactions on  Environment and Development, 15, 593–604. Available at: https://www.wseas.org/multimedia/journals/environment/2019/ b245115-062.pdf 12. Kangas, R., Aarrevaara, T. (2020). Higher Education Institutions as Knowledge Brokers in Smart Specialisation. Sustainability, 12 (7),  3044. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/su12073044  13. Thomas, E., Faccin, K., Asheim, B. T. (2020). Universities as orchestrators of the development of regional innovation ecosystems in  emerging economies. Growth and Change, 52 (2), 770–789. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/grow.12442  14. Iglesias-S ánchez, P. P., Jambrino-Maldonado, C., de las Heras-Pedrosa, C. (2019). Training Entrepreneurial Competences with Open  Innovation Paradigm in Higher Education. Sustainability, 11 (17), 4689. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/su11174689  15. Christensen, C. M. (1997). The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail. Boston, MA: Harvard  Business School Press. Available at: https://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Pages/item.aspx?num=46 16. Allen, D. W. E., Potts, J. (2016). How innovation commons contribute to discovering and developing new technologies. International  Journal of the Commons, 10 (2), 1035–1054. doi: https://doi.org/10.18352/ijc.644  17. Kommertsializatsiya tekhnologiy na ranney stadii. Issledovanie global’nyh praktik: Universitety, Korporatsii, Gosudarstvo.  Available at: http://ukros.ru/archives/9803 18. Florida, R. (2014). The Creative Class and Economic Development. Economic Development Quarterly, 28 (3), 196–205. doi:  https://doi.org/10.1177/0891242414541693  19. Cai, Y., Ramis Ferrer, B., Luis Martinez Lastra, J. (2019). Building University-Industry Co-Innovation Networks in Transnational  Innovation Ecosystems: Towards a Transdisciplinary Approach of Integrating Social Sciences and Artificial Intelligence.  Sustainability, 11 (17), 4633. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/su11174633  20. --- Intelligence.  Sustainability, 11 (17), 4633. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/su11174633  20. Pattnaik, P. N., Pandey, S. C. (2014). University spinoffs: what, why, and how? Technology Innovation Management Review, 4 (12),  44–50. doi: https://doi.org/10.22215/timreview/857  21. Cruz-Amar án, D., Guerrero, M., Hern ández-Ruiz, A. D. (2020). Changing Times at Cuban Universities: Looking into the Transition  towards a Social, Entrepreneurial and Innovative Organization. Sustainability, 12 (6), 2536. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/ su12062536  22. Pererva, P., Kuchynskyi, V., Kobielieva, T., Kosenko, A., Maslak, O. (2021). Economic substantiation of outsourcing the information  technologies and logistic services in the intellectual and innovative activities of an enterprise. Eastern-European Journal of  Enterprise Technologies, 4 (13 (112)), 6–14. doi: https://doi.org/10.15587/1729-4061.2021.239164  23. Global’niy innovatsionniy indeks 2020 g. Kto budet finansirovat’ innovatsii. Available at: https://www.globalinnovationindex.org/ userfiles/file/reportpdf/GII_2020_KeyFindings_RU_web.pdf 24. Gontareva, I. (2021). Innovative entrepreneurship in conditions of limitations and crisis. Herald of Khmelnytskyi National  University, 1 (5), 185–189. doi: https://doi.org/10.31891/2307-5740-2021-298-5(1)-31  25. Osipov, G. V., Strikhanov, M. N., Sheregi, F. E. (2014). Interaction of science and industry: sociological analysis. Moscow: TSSP i M,  364. Available at: https://5top100.ru/upload/iblock/22f/nauka_proizvodstvo_chast1_2013_chast_1_17_01_14.pdf 26. Ukrainskyi fond startapiv. Available at: https://usf.com.ua/ 27. Kuratko, D. F., Audretsch, D. B. (2021). The future of entrepreneurship: the few or the many? Small Business Economics. doi:  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-021-00534-0
Eastern-European Journal of Enterprise Technologies  ISSN 1729-3774  1/13 ( 115 ) 20226828. Robyty startapy na parakh: YEP i Diya.Biznes zapuskaiut «Pidpryiemnytskyi universytet» u novomu navchalnomu rotsi. Available  at: https://www.kmu.gov.ua/news/robiti-startapi-na-parah-yep-i-diyabiznes-zapuskayut-pidpriyemnickij-universitet-u-novomu- navchalnomu-roci 29. Gontareva, I., Babenko, V., Shmatko, N., Litvinov, O., Obruch, H. (2020). The Model of Network Consulting Communication  at the Early Stages of Entrepreneurship. Wseas Transactions on Environment and Development, 16, 390–396. doi: https:// doi.org/10.37394/232015.2020.16.39  30. Startup University. Available at: http://oneu.edu.ua/ru/startup-university/ 31. About AUTM. Available at: http://www.autm.net/autm-info/ 32. Metodychni rekomendatsiyi shchodo stvorennia ta diyalnosti tsentriv TT. Available at: https://mon.gov.ua/ua/nauka/innovacijna- diyalnist-ta-transfer-tehnologij/metodichni-materiali 33. Ukrainska intehrovana systema transferu tekhnolohiy. Available at: http://untt.com.ua/ua/about/info 34. Informatsiyno-analitychna zapyska shchodo vplyvu diyalnosti u sferi transferu tekhnolohiy na finansovyi stan pidpryiemstv,  ustanov ta orhanizatsiy. Available at: https://mon.gov.ua/storage/app/media/nauka/2021/Transefer.tekhnolohiy/06/23/ Zvit.vplyv.na.finstan.u.2020.rotsi.sayt.MON-23.06.21.pdf
El texto aborda el tema de la transferencia de tecnologías en la industria, energía y nanotecnología, presentando los modelos conceptuales más comunes: el modelo de tracción, empuje y modelos lineales combinados. El modelo de tracción se basa en la demanda del mercado de consumo, mientras que el modelo de empuje surge de propuestas de desarrollos iniciativos. Los modelos combinados integran ambos enfoques, lo que complica la organización del proceso de transferencia y requiere servicios de intermediación, consultoría y gestión.

Se destaca la importancia de la estructura de participantes en el proceso de innovación, que se define como un ecosistema innovador, impulsado por tecnologías de comunicación modernas. Esto ha dado lugar al concepto de innovaciones abiertas, que involucra la participación voluntaria de diversas entidades en la creación, comercialización y uso colectivo de innovaciones.

Se menciona la diversidad de formas, métodos y condiciones de actividad empresarial, y se destaca la importancia de cada contexto particular en el mecanismo de transferencia de tecnología. Además, se hace referencia a la mejora del ecosistema innovador en las universidades, destacando la importancia de la colaboración y la creación colectiva en la innovación.

Se citan referencias relevantes que abordan temas relacionados con la transferencia de tecnología, como mecanismos de transferencia, modelos integrados para la transferencia de tecnología y la importancia de la innovación y la colaboración en las empresas. En resumen, el texto destaca la importancia de los ecosistemas innovadores, la colaboración y la creación colectiva en el proceso de transferencia de tecnología. Además, se discute la importancia de la educación superior en los ecosistemas de innovación, así como la necesidad de modelos de negocio abiertos en la innovación. También se aborda la creación y comercialización de la innovación en diferentes contextos, como la innovación abierta, de usuario y acumulativa.

Se mencionan casos de estudio específicos, como el impacto de la educación superior en el emprendimiento y el ecosistema de la innovación en México, así como la orquestación de un ecosistema de innovación universitaria en una universidad brasileña. Además, se revisan los factores de éxito de los ecosistemas de innovación a través de una revisión de la literatura.

En resumen, el texto aborda diversos aspectos relacionados con la transferencia de tecnologías, la innovación y los ecosistemas de innovación en diferentes contextos y sectores. Se destaca la importancia de los intermediarios del sistema de triple hélice, la educación superior y los modelos de negocio abiertos en el fomento de la innovación y el desarrollo de redes de innovación en diferentes campos.
