Developing the next generation of entrepreneurs: Giving students the opportunity to gain experience and thrive Robin Bell Worcester Business School, University of Worcester, UK article info Article history: Received 20 July 2014Received in revised form 6 December 2014 Accepted 11 December 2014 Available online 6 January 2015 Keywords: Entrepreneurship education Experiential learningEntrepreneurial traitsabstract Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) have increasingly utilized experiential approaches in business education; however, some researchers have suggested that further research is required to investigate the effectiveness and student reaction to such approaches. The aimof this study is to determine the impact of an experiential learning approach on theperceived development of entrepreneurial traits and to measure the level of both student engagement and satisfaction. The approach was designed and tested during a Higher National Diploma (HND) entrepreneurship module in a British HEI. Traditional taughtsessions were blended with applied activities that required students to utilize the skills they learned to complete steps of the activities, which increased in length and complexity. Results found both a high level of student satisfaction and engagement and the belief thatthe module's experiential approach had, in many instances, helped to develop entrepre- neurial traits. Successful practice and modi ﬁcations are discussed. ©2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 1. Introduction Within the last two decades, higher education has seen considerable growth in both the development of entrepreneurship as a subject and in the number of entrepreneurship courses offered. Entrepreneurship courses are mainly found in business schools within higher education institutions (HEIs) ( Collins, Smith, &Hannon, 2006 ), and are often taught alongside tradi- tional business disciplines, including management, marketing and ﬁnance. Entrepreneurship education can be de ﬁned as the
including management, marketing and ﬁnance. Entrepreneurship education can be de ﬁned as the development of attitudes, behaviours, and capabilities that can be applied during an individual's career as an entrepreneur (Wilson, 2008 ). However, entrepreneurship is a complex phenomenon that requires decision making across all aspects of business activity in situations where there are high levels of uncertainty in a global and dynamic socio-technical context (Timmons, Gillin, Burshtein, &Spinelli, 2011 ). This has led to considerable debate in the literature regarding the most appropriate teaching methods to develop entrepreneurial knowledge and stimulate learning ( Balan&Metcalfe, 2012 ). Past research has suggested that the success of entrepreneurship education has been mixed, with some research reporting positive outcomes (e.g. Athayde, 2009; Fayolle, Gailly, &Lassas-Clerc, 2006 ;Karlsson &Moberg, 2013 ), and other research reporting less favourable outcomes (e.g. Von Graevenitz, Harhoff, &Weber, 2010; Oosterbeek, van Praag, &Ijsselstein, 2010 ). The lack of consistency in the ﬁndings may be due, in part, to methodological weaknesses. It may also be attributed to a general lack of agreement on a conceptual model for the analysis of entrepreneurial education ( Von Graevenitz et al., 2010 ). Academic support has been increasing for the use of non-traditional higher education learning environments in the study of entrepreneurship ( Gibb, 2002; Jones &English, 2004 ). As a result, many entrepreneurship educators have adopted E-mail address: r.bell@worc.ac.uk . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect The International Journal of Management Education journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijme http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijme.2014.12.002 1472-8117/ ©2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47
approaches based on Kolb's experiential learning cycle ( Kolb, 1984 ), which draws on earlier works that emphasize the central role experience plays in learning and development ( Dewey, 1963; Piaget, 1950 ) to develop a dynamic, holistic model of an experience-based learning process ( Kolb&Kolb, 2009 ). This approach departs from traditional lecturer-led passive learning, increasing the emphasis on action-orientated or active experiential learning, problem solving, project-based learning and peer evaluation. This has led to a wide range of new active and creative problem solving and learning by doing experiential approaches being adopted. New approaches have included business simulations, meeting and interviewing entrepreneurs, developing business plans, and attending entrepreneurship forums. Piercy (2013) argues however, that while experiential approaches have become an increasingly favoured form of pedagogy for business educators, student reactions to experiential approaches require further investigation. The qualitative research herein builds on previous research by exploring how experiential learning in an applied setting supports the development of four key entrepreneurial behaviours or characteristics. The teaching approach required par- ticipants to be actively involved in planning, developing, and implementing two student-led events. The students then re- ported via re ﬂective essays on how, and whether, the four key behaviours had been utilized, and how they could have been used and developed further. Additional qualitative feedback was collected through a series of interviews. Finally, students' module evaluations were analyzed to discern student satisfaction with these experiential approaches. 2. Literature review 2.1. Active and experiential learning The development of students' critical thinking skills is one of the main goals of higher education. This encourages the movement beyond knowledge comprehension and towards the higher order skills of
This encourages the movement beyond knowledge comprehension and towards the higher order skills of analysis, synthesis and evaluation (Bloom, Engelhart, Furst, Hill, &Krathwohl, 1956 ). The core elements of active learning are student activity and student engagement in the learning process, in contrast to traditional lecture formats where content is passively transmitted from thelecturer to the students ( Prince, 2004 ). In this process, active learning should involve the use of the higher order thinking skills of analysis, synthesis and evaluation. In the past, it has been argued that higher education institutions have done little to foster active learning aimed at developing the critical thinking and creativity of business students. As a result, corporations have reported that entry-level graduates have been lacking in these skills ( Snyder, 2003 ). Business schools have increased their focus on developing the skills required for business, marketing and entrepre- neurship, and instructors are exploring new and inventive ways to introduce active and experiential approaches that can help to prepare students for their future careers. Experiential learning can be described as a participatory form of learning that involves participants in using a range of mental processes to synthesize information in an active and immersive environment (Feinstein, Mann, &Corsun, 2002 ). Kolb (1984, p. 6) described the importance of participants being “able to involve themselves fully, openly, and without bias in new experiences; they must be able to observe and re ﬂect on these experiences from many perspectives; they must be able to create concepts that integrate their observations into logically sound theories; and they must be able to use these theories to make decisions and solve problems ”. Experiential Learning Theory has had a major impact on both the design and delivery of educational programmes in management training and development, and formal management education (
of educational programmes in management training and development, and formal management education ( Kolb&Kolb, 2009 ). Many business school edu- cators have accordingly adopted approaches based on Kolb's (1984) experiential learning cycle to develop a dynamic, holistic model of an experience-based learning process. It is a process through which knowledge is created through the transformation of experience ( Kolb, 1984 , p. 41), and as such involves an active interpretation of experience. Re ﬂection is an important element in this approach and structured approaches to the re ﬂective stage can enhance this process ( Platzer, Snelling, &Blake, 1997 ). As academic literature has increasingly recognized the value of non-traditional higher education learning environments (emphasizing action-orientated experiential learning), new approaches have been introduced within the HEI system to reap the bene ﬁts of experiential learning. It has been argued that such active learning approaches address many of traditional teaching approaches' limitations ( Caldwell, 2007; Knight &Wood, 2005; Lean, Moizer, Towler, &Abbey, 2006; Mahajan, 2012; Makienko &Bernard, 2012; Ruben, 1999 ), and generally result in improved knowledge retention, increased problem solving skills and increased motivation for future learning ( Bonwell &Eison, 1991; Rhem, 1998; Snyder, 2003 ). Importantly, it has been argued that whilst lectures are a useful vehicle for imparting knowledge, they do not lead to thought or attitude adjustment and the development of behavioural skills or inspire interest in the subject ( Grimley, Green, Nilsen, Thompson, & Tomes, 2011 ). However, active engagement in an activity together with enjoyment of the experience can signi ﬁcantly increase both motivation and learning ( Elam&Spotts, 2004; Karns, 2005 ). It is, perhaps, not surprising that active experiential learning approaches are increasingly being introduced into syllabi to supplement traditional teaching formats ( Daly,
are increasingly being introduced into syllabi to supplement traditional teaching formats ( Daly, 2001; Karns, 2005; Piercy, 2013 ). While studies on student satisfaction with experiential learning are varied, Piercy and Caldwell (2011) found, in a multicultural study, that students reported high levels of satisfaction with experiential learning. 2.2. Working within groups Working within groups on a project provides a forum for experiential learning, enabling a student-centred focus in the classroom that creates an active learning experience ( Patel, 2003 ). A cooperative learning experience can enhance studentR. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 38
success by enabling students to share understanding and support one another. It may increase student motivation, as stu- dents may feel a sense of accountability ( Ormrod, 2008 ).Tsay and Brady (2012) found that involvement in cooperative learning is a positive predictor of academic performance. Johnson and Johnson (1986) found that students involved in cooperative learning retained information for longer and achieved higher levels of thought than their peers who worked alone. Students have also been shown to develop their higher-order critical thinking skills as a result of cooperative learning (Gokhale, 1995 ). 2.3. Entrepreneurial education It is now generally accepted that entrepreneurship, or at least certain facets of it, can be taught and that entrepreneurship is not limited only to those who are born with certain skills, characteristics and attributes ( Drucker, 1985; Kuratko, 2005; Robinson, Stimpson, Huefner, &Hunt, 1991 ). Entrepreneurship is often taught in business schools alongside traditional management disciplines. As a result, educators may use different teaching approaches that are based on the learning ob- jectives and the requirements of students ( Van der Sijde, Ridder, Blaauw, &Diensberg, 2008 ). Traditional management education can be regarded as being positivistic in nature whilst the entrepreneurial process requires a plethora of skills and is idiosyncratic in its nature ( Jack&Anderson,1999 ). The entrepreneurial process involves the creation of something, often using new processes or techniques, in order to extract value ( Schumpeter, 1942 ). It is based on opportunity recognition and is necessarily an inductive process, usually involving varying degrees of risk and uncertainty (Jack&Anderson, 1999 ). This type of education and learning requires exposure to and engagement in the often complex stages of the entrepreneurial process, which requires a different learning environment within the higher education setting (Gibb, 2002; Jones
requires a different learning environment within the higher education setting (Gibb, 2002; Jones &English, 2004 ). This involves a departure from traditional lecturer-led passive learning towards an increased emphasis on action-orientated, experiential learning, problem solving, project-based learning and peer evaluation. Zahra and Welter (2008, p. 188) have argued, “Entrepreneurial skills are learned in a variety of ways and methods. Some entrepreneurial skills are best learnt by doing and observing others. Whilst lecture based education has its place in the curriculum, the training of future entrepreneurs should also include interactive and action orientated methods. ” It has been argued that entrepreneurship education can develop new entrepreneurial skills by including real-life expe- riences ( Arvanites, Glasgow, Klingler, &Stumpf, 2006 ).Jones and Iredale (2010) suggested that entrepreneurship education requires experiential learning styles, creative problem solving and learning by doing in order to engage students. This approach departs from the traditional lecturer-led passive learning, towards a greater emphasis on action-orientated, experiential learning, problem solving, and project-based learning style of teaching ( Jones&English, 2004 ). Support has also been expressed for action-orientated learning by doing activities in group or network contexts ( Rasmussen &Sørheim, 2006 ), and for student led approaches ( Fiet, 2001 ). Some educators have argued for the implementation of experiential approaches such as meeting and interviewing entrepreneurs, developing business plans, and attending entrepreneurship forums ( Sherman, Sebora, &Digman, 2008 ), computer simulations, business visits, and relevant and realistic class exercises (Solomon, 2008 ). Other approaches have included social enterprise placements, case study workshops ( Bevan &Kipka, 2012 ), and involvement in business consulting initiatives ( Hynes &Richardson, 2007 ).Bevan and Kipka (2012)
involvement in business consulting initiatives ( Hynes &Richardson, 2007 ).Bevan and Kipka (2012) suggest that the most commonly adopted experiential learning formats in business schools include team building exercises, simulations, guest speakers and internships. 2.4. Key entrepreneurial characteristics Entrepreneurial education can be viewed broadly in terms of both the skills that can be taught and in the characteristics that can be encouraged and developed in individuals ( Jones&English, 2004 ). Three of the most widely studied and discussed entrepreneurial behaviours or characteristics in the entrepreneurship literature are those of innovativeness, the willingness to take risks, and proactiveness (e.g. Covin &Slevin, 1989; Lumpkin & Dess,1996; Wiklund,1999 ). Based on Miller's (1983) conceptualization, these three dimensions have been identi ﬁed and used consistently as a measure of the ‘entrepreneurial orientation ’of organizations ( Rauch, Wiklund, Lumpkin, &Frese, 2009 ), which has emerged as a major construct within the strategic management and entrepreneurship literature over the last twenty years ( Tang, Tang, Marino, Zhang, &Li, 2008 ). Developed into a measurement instrument by Covin and Slevin (1989) , to measure the entrepreneurial orientation of organizations, these behaviours have more recently been used to measure entrepreneurial orientation at an academic level (e.g. Bolton &Lane, 2012; Taatila &Down, 2012 ).Bolton and Lane (2012) developed a measurement instrument based on these three dimensions to measure the entrepreneurial orientation of in- dividual university students, which was found to correlate with entrepreneurial intention. This research will focus on these three characteristics, together with the degree of self-ef ﬁcacy/esteem/con ﬁdence of individual students. The self-ef ﬁcacy construct has played an important part in entrepreneur motivation research ( Pruett, Shinnar, Toney, Llopis, &Fox, 2009 ) and has been widely studied as an
research ( Pruett, Shinnar, Toney, Llopis, &Fox, 2009 ) and has been widely studied as an entrepreneurial behavioural trait in both professionals and students (e.g. Florin, Karri, & Rossiter, 2007; Gelderen, Brand, &Praag, 2008 ;Harris, Gibson, &Taylor, 2007; Louw, Eeden, Bosch, &Venter, 2003; Pruett et al., 2009; Robinson et al., 1991 ). There is also much empirical evidence of the connection between perceived self- efﬁcacy and entrepreneurial intentions ( Pruett et al., 2009; Sesen, 2013 :Zhao, Seibert, &Hills, 2005 ). The four characteristics that will be used in this research are now considered brie ﬂy.R. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 39
2.4.1. Innovativeness Innovation is a constant theme within entrepreneurship literature ( Drucker, 1985; Lumpkin &Dess, 1996; Miller, 1983 ). Lumpkin and Dess (2001) deﬁned innovation in terms of developing and introducing new products and services, whilst Robinson et al. (1991) considered it in terms of perceiving and acting upon activities in new and unique ways. Innovation often involves creation or creative destruction ( Schumpeter, 1942 ).Drucker (1985) argued that innovation and entrepre- neurship go hand in hand. Gundry, Ofstein and Kickul (2014) suggested that the development of increased perceived crea- tivity during an entrepreneurship module could result in a transfer of innovative skills to the workplace. 2.4.2. Proactiveness The proactive nature of entrepreneurs has been highlighted by many researchers including Covin and Slevin (1989), Lumpkin and Dess (1996), Miller (1983) , and Naman and Slevin (1993) . Proactiveness can be considered as the opposite of reactiveness and focuses on implementation and on making things happen, using any means necessary ( Davis, Morris, & Allen, 1991 ). It may involve opportunity seeking, forward looking and anticipating the future actions of competitors (Lumpkin &Dess, 2001 ).Crant (2000) deﬁned proactive behaviour as an individual's initiative to improve on or to create entirely new circumstances. 2.4.3. Risk taking It has been argued that risk is inherently embodied in the practice of entrepreneurship; the creation of new ventures is inherently a risk-laden process ( Aldrich &Martinez, 2007 ). Evidence that entrepreneurs have a more positive attitude to- wards risk than non-entrepreneurs has been found by many researchers, including Stewart and Roth (2004), Begley and Boyd (1987), Carland, Carland, Carland, and Pearce (1995) , and Stewart, Watson, Carland, and Carland (1999) .Davis et al. (1991) highlighted that entrepreneurship involves a balance of the associated risks involved and an attempt to manage those risks.
involves a balance of the associated risks involved and an attempt to manage those risks. Denslow and Giunipero (2003) have argued that entrepreneurs are prepared to take calculated risks and can make decisions based on limited information, as they possess an on-going desire to set and obtain increasingly challenging goals. In a business setting, entrepreneurs are generally perceived as more open to risk than managers ( Masters &Meier, 1988 ) because entrepreneurs bear the ultimate responsibility for the decision ( Gasse, 1982 ). 2.4.4. Self-ef ﬁcacy Self-ef ﬁcacy (also referred to as self-con ﬁdence and self-esteem) is a belief in one's ability to successfully complete a task or attain a desired goal, and as such, is a useful construct to predict an entrepreneur's behavioural choice, level of persistence, and overall effectiveness ( Chen, Green, &Crick, 1998 ). It has been argued that differences in work interest and performance can often be linked to differences in self-ef ﬁcacy, which affects individual persistence, initiative and performance ( Krueger, 2000 ). Entrepreneurial self-ef ﬁcacy has been widely researched as one of the personality traits that motivates entrepreneurial behaviour ( Chen et al., 1998; de Pillis &Reardon, 2007 ;Karlsson &Moberg, 2013 ), and enables entrepreneurs to recognize opportunities, manage resources, and juggle the challenges of enterprise management ( Kumar, 2007; Shane, Locke, &Collins, 2003 ). There is also empirical evidence showing a connection between perceived self-ef ﬁcacy and entrepreneurial intentions (Zhao et al., 2005 ). 3. Research aim HEIs have increasingly utilized experiential approaches in business education; however, Piercy (2013) has suggested that further research is required to investigate the effectiveness and student reaction to experiential learning approaches. This paper investigates how experiential learning in an applied setting can aid the development of four key entrepreneurial behaviours identi ﬁed
in an applied setting can aid the development of four key entrepreneurial behaviours identi ﬁed above. The research identi ﬁes successful practice and seeks to explore how the approaches used in the study could be adjusted to improve students learning. Finally, this research seeks to measure the level of both student engagement and satisfaction. 4. The course and methodology 4.1. The module A new entrepreneurship Higher National Diploma (HND) module was set up at a UK HEI to provide applied ‘scaffolded ’ activities that increased in length and complexity. Twenty-nine students registered for the module, which was conducted over the course of one academic year. The module's taught content consisted of twenty weekly sessions. During the ﬁrst third of each session, the instructor presented the week's topics and discussed how the topic applied to their group activity. Afterthis, the students applied the day's lesson in small groups, which they organized themselves, as they worked towards the module's two applied activities. The information was thus presented in bite-sized pieces, with ample time for students to reﬂect and apply what they had just learned within peer groups. Guidance was available from the instructor, as needed. As the semester progressed, students were given greater autonomy and less guidance as they developed their entrepreneurial skills. Structured re ﬂection was built into the applied activities to help students question, make sense of, and come to a better understanding of what had taken place ( Mezirow, 1990; Platzer et al., 1997; Ross, 2011 ). In short, the module provided theR. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 40
basic knowledge about entrepreneurial skills via traditional lectures, experiential opportunities to set up and run a venture, and post-activity re ﬂection on the decisions made and actions taken, allowing learners to identify the areas of strength and weakness, as well as developments made through the module. 4.2. Applied activity 1: pop-up shop Students were assigned the task of organizing a pop-up shop in the city's main shopping centre. The instructor gave students the objective of using the shop to promote the University facilities, focussing on its aspects that could be enjoyed by the public, e.g., the library, sports teams, and museum. Students organized themselves in groups of ﬁve, planned their event, and set performance objectives. Each group identi ﬁed the resources they would need for their shop, with the instructor providing suggestions. After the pop-up shops, students re ﬂected on the activity and made presentations to their classmates outlining their successes, changes they made during the event, and what they would have done differently. 4.3. Applied activity 2: social event Students organized and managed a theme-night event for university students. Less structure was provided for this activity, and students groups were challenged to apply their learning to make their event pro ﬁtable. For example, groups performed market research during the design phase of their enterprise. The groups composed individual business plans that detailed the management, marketing, and ﬁnancing of the theme night. They then worked with the instructor to procure resources and with the venue manager to coordinate logistics. Groups carried out their events on consecutive Monday nights at the HEI Student Union. 4.4. Student assessment Students were assessed at three stages of the module. The ﬁrst assessment was the group presentation following the pop- up shop. For the second assessment, the instructor evaluated the business plans students developed for the social event for
assessment, the instructor evaluated the business plans students developed for the social event for suitability and professionalism, as well as its enactment. Students wrote an essay for the third assessment in which they critically re ﬂected on the module and discussed how the taught content and the applied activities developed their entre- preneurial traits and behaviours. Entrepreneurial behaviours and traits were discussed throughout the module and students were thus prepared to re ﬂect on these by the time they composed their essays. In addition, they were asked what changes could be introduced to make the experiential learning more effective in developing the entrepreneurial traits. Feedback was available throughout the module and after each assessment. The planned learning and teaching activities and assessments were aligned with the intended learning outcomes, in line with Biggs' (1996) work on constructive alignment. The activities and assessments were thus designed to enable students to construct their own learning. A breakdown of the intended learning outcomes and the module assessments are displayed inTable 1 . 4.5. Methodology The re ﬂective essays students composed at the end of the module were thematically analyzed to determine if and how the activities and sessions had helped to support and develop their entrepreneurial outlooks. Thematic analysis offered a ﬂexible approach to identify reoccurring themes. It provided a top-down perspective to identify and explore how the students' key entrepreneurial characteristics were developed through their experience. A total of twenty seven complete re ﬂective essays were used for the thematic analysis. This was supplemented by one-to-one feedback from fourteen of the students, as part of Table 1 Intended learning outcomes &module assessments. Intended learning outcomes To be able to: 1. Understand and apply market research in the formulation of a business venture idea. 2. Assess the key resources and
market research in the formulation of a business venture idea. 2. Assess the key resources and capabilities required to launch a new venture.3. Demonstrate effective presentation skills and business plan development.4. Understand and apply entrepreneurial skills to the development and enactment of a new venture.5. Identify and critically analyze the application and development of entrepreneurial skills. Summative module assessment Intended learning outcome assessed Assignment 1 epop-up shop Pop-up shop re ﬂection presentation 2, 3 Assignment 2 esocial event Development of a business plan for the proposed event; Enactment of the proposed event1, 2, 3, 4 Assignment 3 ecritical re ﬂection Critical re ﬂective analysis of entrepreneurial skill development 5R. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 41
theﬁnal semester review process. Additional feedback and comments about the module were also collected via the standard university module evaluation process. 5. Results The data collected was thematically analyzed using a top down approach, using the four key entrepreneurial character- istics previously identi ﬁed and discussed earlier for classi ﬁcation. In addition, the student feedback and perceptions of the module were identi ﬁed and discussed. Each entrepreneurial characteristic is considered in terms of how successful the experiential learning approach was in developing the individual characteristic, what was successful within the experientiallearning tasks, and what adjustments could be made to improve the learning from the students' perspective. 5.1. Preference for innovation Almost all students reported that they had a better understanding of the importance of innovation and creativity in the business process as a result of completing the module. Some students reported an increased awareness of the bene ﬁts that being open to change could provide. “For the event night, we did not make a pro ﬁt; I think if we had spent more time being innovative, we could have done better .” “The activities helped me understand the importance of being innovative and better understand what I can do to keep improving myself to be more innovative .” The data highlighted that the tasks in class, wherein students needed to generate innovative business ideas for their enterprises, had helped students understand and appreciate the basis of innovation and how innovative ideas could be constructed. Also, the ﬁrst enterprise that the students ran (the pop-up shop) had encouraged innovation and making changes “on their feet. ”The time-bound nature of the task meant that many of the groups had to make changes to their strategies and approaches during the running of their pop-up shop in order to engage different customers: “I would have not gone out of my comfort zone this way, if not
order to engage different customers: “I would have not gone out of my comfort zone this way, if not for the Pop-Up Shop …… I became open to new ways to gain people's attention and became more con ﬁdent ” Students also re ﬂected that the time-bound pressure of the second enterprise encouraged them to adopt creative and innovative approaches to planning, advertising and running the event: “Using Facebook to communicate with other group members helped me to be more open to different ways of communicating within a group …… I found I enjoyed it .” “The use of social media to advertise our event was very effective and reduced the loss of time advertising the event .” Students indicated that having to compete with other bars and venues while running their social event forced them to think of innovative ideas in order to offer something different and/or target a different segment in order to make the event a success: “I felt compelled to come up with ideas that local venues had not already come up with .” “The event night required us to think on our feet and come up with new ideas along the way as we were planning .” Students highlighted that the size of the groups had a limiting impact on innovation; in some cases, students felt embarrassed to present their ‘innovative ’ideas to the other group members. It was suggested that smaller groups would allow greater involvement of the individual members and would allow for increased participation in the decision making. Although group learning can be bene ﬁcial to weaker students by providing peer support to increase their self-esteem and facilitate their learning ( Crooks, 1988 ), certain student groupings may still ﬁnd it dif ﬁcult to participate in active engagement. Smaller groups may be more advantageous ( Kerr, 1983 ), although this would require greater organization and greater funding. It was also highlighted that activities allowing students to consider existing products/services and discussions of the innovative
allowing students to consider existing products/services and discussions of the innovative changes/developments could be introduced to provide examples of different bases of innovation. Looking at SME case studies was also highlighted as a way students believed their innovation skills could be improved. This could be introduced as part of the course material either before or during the module. 5.2. Proactive disposition The in ﬂuence of the module on students' proactive disposition was mixed. Some students felt that they were already proactive and the module did little to develop it further. Other students reported that the module made them aware that theyneeded to be more proactive to be successful at the applied activities. Students reported that: “This set back in the event has allowed me to reconsider how proactive I actually am .” “I had the opportunities to be proactive but did not take them .”R. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 42
It was widely reported that the two enterprises made students think and plan ahead in order to make the arrangements, order the materials required, and market the events. For example, one group polled their peers to gauge interest in different event night themes to ensure students would be interested in attending. Students also widely reported that working within groups increased their perceived accountability, which increased their proactiveness, as many of the students did not want to let their group down. Students reported that increased competition between the groups and incentives would have increased the motivation and further encouraged their proactiveness. This is an interesting point; the creation of speci ﬁc goals along with a sense of competition can create student engagement with an activity ( Ahamer, 2004 ). Whilst the students were divided into two groups for the second event, competition between the two groups was not actively encouraged. This is an element that could be considered for future such modules. A reoccurring theme emerged that students felt if they had seen business plans previously produced by other students for similar activities, they would have understood the complexity and expectations of the enterprises. Students felt these ex- amples would have helped them act more proactively. However, the goal of the exercise was to allow the students free reign and not restrict or direct them, instead allowing them to ﬁnd their own way to apply the taught principles. Entrepreneurial learning involves not only avoiding the mistakes of others and repeating what others have successfully done in the past, but an active interpretation of experience by the learner ( Man, 2006 ). It is debateable whether students would learn more with a format to reference or whether this would restrict their ideas and creativity. 5.3. Self-ef ﬁcacy Self-ef ﬁcacy was the most widely reported entrepreneurial behaviour to be developed through the course of the module.
most widely reported entrepreneurial behaviour to be developed through the course of the module. Almost all students reported an increase in entrepreneurial con ﬁdence after completing the two enterprises, leading to a sense of achievement and worthiness. An increased con ﬁdence in self-promotion was also widely reported upon completion of the module. This came from completing several activities throughout the course of the module, including presenting and pitching ideas, overcoming setbacks and challenges, being part of a group, and developing and running an event from scratch. Comments included: “At the end of the event my self-ef ﬁcacy had dramatically increased as I did not believe we would be able to pull off an event as big as this one .” “I took more leadership than I ever have before and that gave me the skills needed to be successful and con ﬁdent for the event night .” “Presenting individually to my peers is good practice for a future career in business .” Suggestions as to how students' self-ef ﬁcacy could be improved further were largely based on increased individual accountability. It was suggested that this could have drawn out quieter members of the group, who were at the periphery of the activities. One suggestion was that students should present their ideas individually, and individual tasks could have been delegated not within the group, but by the instructor. Another suggestion was to have the instructor assign group members, rather than allowing the students to choose their own groups. Students believed this would have taken students out of their comfort zones and developed individual self-ef ﬁcacy. All of these suggestions could easily be incorporated in future modules. Indeed, Oakley, Brent, Felder, and Elhajj (2004) stresses the importance of forming effective groups, as it allows for students to gain improved communication skills and the ability to learn at a deeper level. Hansen (2006) argues that instructor organized groups are more
ability to learn at a deeper level. Hansen (2006) argues that instructor organized groups are more effective than randomized group formations. Interestingly, the feedback seemed to suggest that self-ef ﬁcacy was a driver for some of the other dimensions. One example was: “Due to the various activities on the module, my con ﬁdence has been enhanced and I now have a stronger belief in my ability to complete tasks, demonstrate my abilities and not be afraid to be innovative .” 5.4. Attitude to risk taking Many of the students found that their attitude towards risk had changed signi ﬁcantly. It was apparent that many of the students had never considered entrepreneurial risk taking and the enterprise activities had helped them to re ﬂect on the beneﬁts of taking calculated risks. “I am more likely to take risks now …… I now see risk taking as more positive than negative .” “I learnt that risks can bring rewards and they can be calculated to be an asset to an entrepreneur .” “I always thought risk was a bad thing. I am now much more open to take risks as long as I have some base of information that offers less probability of failing .” Organizing and carrying out the events entailed ongoing decision-making, and this was a new experience for many students, particularly those who previously had not been involved in assessing risk and making decisions. A reoccurringR. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 43
theme which came out of the data was that students had an increased realization that running a business didn't involve taking just one risk, but rather a series of interlinked decisions were required in order to balance risk. “How to allocate our budget, and what to buy etc. involved a lot of risk but we were able to calculate them, so they paid off .” After re ﬂection, students suggested that other activities which might help develop their attitudes and approach to risk included speaking with real life entrepreneurs about the risks they had taken and the risks well-known businesses had taken to get started. It was also suggested that a risk analysis of setting up a business would make students more aware of the practical risks and decisions that would have to be made in the initial set-up of a business post-graduation. Many of these suggestions have previously been discussed in the literature (e.g. Sherman et al., 2008 ). 6. Student feedback Based on student module evaluation, the module received positive module feedback, with 92.9% of students either strongly agreeing or agreeing that ‘they would recommend the module to a friend ’. All of the students either strongly agreed or agreed that they ‘felt fully engaged with this module ’. Positive comments about the experiential learning opportunity that this module provided included: “I thought having £250 of cash was an excellent idea as we were actually dealing with real money and not just pound ﬁgures on paper. It did make the ideas more real, and deciding what to buy with real money rather than paper or imitation money helped with making business decisions and the ﬁgures .” Through the student feedback comments, it was clear that many of the students enjoyed the practical ‘hands-on ’nature of the module and enjoyed the freedom and creativity that it offered. However, it was also evident that whilst some of the students enjoyed and appreciated the independence the module offered, other students would have preferred
enjoyed and appreciated the independence the module offered, other students would have preferred more structure and guidance on setting up the enterprises. Some students found the module and assignments were unstructured comparedto what they were used to. In a traditional lecture environment, instructors present concepts in a straightforward manner; however, the aim of the module was to encourage students to take control of their learning ( Freeman, 2012 ), their decisions, and to create a need for them to be proactive while completing tasks. Based on the student re ﬂections, many were happy with the arrangements and felt they rose to the occasion. However, some students found this more challenging, and some suggested they had deliberately sought to bene ﬁt from others' work (so-called freeloading). This led some students to suggest that more individual accountability would be useful through individual assessments. Other cited problems included lack of attendance to student arranged meetings, which resulted in delayed decision-making that affected their timelines. Many of these concerns can be addressed by reducing the size of the groups, although this may involve more organization and have cost implications and may require more of the instructors' resources. Latane's social impact theory ( 1973 ), suggests that as group size increases, pressure on the individual diminishes, and the effect of individual non-contribution on the group decreases. Kerr (1983) argued that group size has a direct effect on the motivation of individual group members, with increasing group size contributing to episodes of social loa ﬁng, decreasing individual motivation. Simon and Hamilton (1994) suggest that a four-member group is optimal, as it will increase an individual's accountability while allowing for adequate division of responsibilities. Davies (2009) mirrored this contention, ﬁnding that forming groups of three to four students allowed for better delegation of work and better
that forming groups of three to four students allowed for better delegation of work and better results. In practice, resources, time, and practicalities may determine the group sizes used. 7. Conclusion Experiential approaches to business and entrepreneurship education have become increasingly popular in recent years and now are often seen alongside more traditional approaches. Approaches are increasingly action-orientated, emphasizing a learning by doing approach ( Rasmussen &Sørheim, 2006 ) that can encourage experiential learning by allowing students to actively participate in the entrepreneurial process ( Jones&English, 2004 ). Research suggests that active participation in knowledge creation through group activity or simulation can result in better learning ( Frontczak &Kelly, 2000 ) and furthermore, the challenge of active involvement together with enjoyment of the activity can signi ﬁ cantly increase the motivation and learning of students ( Elam&Spotts, 2004; Karns, 2005 ). Entrepreneurship education can thus bene ﬁt from experiential learning styles, creative problem solving, and learning by doing in order to engage students ( Jones&Iredale, 2010 ). However, it has been argued that further investigation into the effectiveness and student reactions to experiential approaches is required ( Piercy, 2013 ). The approach adopted in this project involved a combination of traditional lectures and active participation in group settings to aid learning and develop basic entrepreneurial skills. The aim of this research was to investigate how experiential learning in this applied setting could help in the development of four key entrepreneurial behaviours identi ﬁed from the literature. The research also sought to identify successful practice and explore how such approaches could be adjusted to improve student learning. Finally, this research sought to measure the level of both student engagement and satisfaction. Based on the student re ﬂections and student
the level of both student engagement and satisfaction. Based on the student re ﬂections and student feedback, the experiential learning approach adopted in this research provided an opportunity to develop each of the four entrepreneurial skills. However, the development of self-ef ﬁcacy wasR. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 44
particularly noticeable. The module's requirement to pitch ideas, present ﬁndings and re ﬂections, and liaise with members of the wider community seemed to encourage the development of self-ef ﬁcacy. Overall, as the students developed and enacted their venture ideas, they also developed self-ef ﬁcacy. It was also interesting to note that the perceptions of attitude to risk and innovation had also positively changed in some cases, as in an understanding of the concept of calculated risks and the use of social media as a communication platform. Interestingly, this approach gave students the opportunity to be creative and innovative, for example, through the advertising and promotion of their events. In contrast, the development of a proactive disposition was met with mixed results, with some students believing they were already proactive, and the module had done little to develop it further, whilst for others the module had highlighted that they needed to be more proactive to be successful. Student feedback indicated a high level of engagement and a high level of student satisfaction. Student suggestions on how to reﬁne the experiential tasks and thus further support the student learning have been considered and discussed in the text. This project has raised several issues that include the consideration of factors such as group size, group formation and the setting of penalties and incentives to make sure all group members are accountable and actively participate. It is worth noting that since some students or cohorts may ﬁnd the lack of formal structure in this type of approach unsettling, the introduction of some periodic formal deadlines and periodic feedback may be advantageous. 7.1. Limitations and future research In common with other research, this study has limitations. It was based on one group of HND students undertaking one module consisting of two active experiential projects. The experiences of different cohorts undertaking different projects may vary.
projects. The experiences of different cohorts undertaking different projects may vary. Although some of the data was collected from critical re ﬂective essays, they were submitted and marked anonymously, which should reduce social desirability bias. Post-course feedback was also collected anonymously. Future research can investigate different academic levels of cohorts and more complex active experiential projects. New innovative projects can be developed to provide new entrepreneurial insights and challenges to different levels of cohorts. Acknowledgements This research was kindly supported by an Academy of Marketing, Teaching and Research Development Grant (2013/14). References Ahamer, G. (2004). Negotiate your future: web-based role play. Campus-Wide Information Systems, 21 (1), 35 e58. Aldrich, H. E., & Martinez, M. A. (2007). Many are called, but few are chosen: an evolutionary perspective for the study of entrepreneurship. In P./C19A. Cuervo, P. D. Ribeiro, & P. S. Roig (Eds.), Entrepreneurship (pp. 293 e311). Springer Berlin Heidelberg . Arvanites, D. A., Glasgow, J. M., Klingler, J. W., & Stumpf, S. A. (2006). Innovation in entrepreneurship education. Journal of Entrepreneurship Education, 9 , 29e44. Athayde, R. (2009). Measuring enterprise potential in young people. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 33 (2), 481 e500. Balan, P., & Metcalfe, M. (2012). Identifying teaching methods that engage entrepreneurship students. Education þTraining, 54 (5), 368 e384. Begley, T., & Boyd, D. (1987). A comparison of entrepreneurs and managers of small business ﬁrms. Journal of Management, 13 (1), 99 e108. Bevan, D., & Kipka, C. (2012). Experiential learning and management education. Journal of Management Development, 31 (3), 193 e197. Biggs, J. (1996). Enhancing teaching through constructive alignment. Higher Education, 32 (3), 347 e364. Bloom, B. S., Engelhart, M. D., Furst, E. J, Hill, W. H, & Krathwohl, D. R. (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives: The classi
Furst, E. J, Hill, W. H, & Krathwohl, D. R. (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives: The classi ﬁcation of educational goals .N e w York: David McKay Company . Bolton, D. L., & Lane, M. D. (2012). Individual entrepreneurial orientation: development of a measurement instrument. Education þTraining, 54 (2/3), 219e233. Bonwell, C. C., & Eison, J. A. (1991). Active learning: Creating excitement in the classroom . Washington, D.C.: Jossey-Bass . Caldwell, J. E. (2007). Clickers in the large classroom: current research and best-practice tips. CBE-Life Sciences Education, 6 (1), 9e20. Carland, J., Carland, J., Carland, J., & Pearce, J. W. (1995). Risk taking propensity among entrepreneurs, small business owners, and managers. Journal of Business and Entrepreneurship, 7 (1), 15 e23. Chen, C., Green, R., & Crick, A. (1998). Does entrepreneurial self-ef ﬁcacy distinguish entrepreneurs from managers. Journal of Business Venturing, 13 (4), 295e316. Collins, L. A., Smith, A. J., & Hannon, P. D. (2006). Applying a synergistic learning approach in entrepreneurship education. Management Learning, 37 (3), 335e354. Covin, J. G., & Slevin, D. P. (1989). Strategic management of small ﬁrms in hostile and benign environments. Strategic Management Journal, 10 (1), 75 e87. Crant, J. M. (2000). Proactive behavior in organizations. Journal of Management, 26 (3), 435 e462. Crooks, T. J. (1988). The impact of classroom evaluation practices on students. Review of Educational Research, 58 (4), 438 e481. Daly, S. P. (2001). Student-operated internet businesses: true experiential learning in entrepreneurship and retail management. Journal of Marketing Ed- ucation, 23 (3), 204 e215. Davies, W. M. (2009). Groupwork as a form of assessment: common problems and recommended solutions. Higher Education, 58 (4), 563 e584. Davis, D., Morris, M., & Allen, J. (1991). Perceived environmental turbulence and its effect on selected entrepreneurship, marketing, and organiza tional characteristics in
and its effect on selected entrepreneurship, marketing, and organiza tional characteristics in industrial ﬁrms. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 19 (1), 43 e51. Denslow, D. L., & Giunipero, L. C. (2003). Improving purchasing success through entrepreneurial behaviour . Nashville, TN: International Supply Management. May 18th e21th . Dewey, J. (1963). Experience and education . New York, NY: Collier Books . Drucker, P. F. (1985). Innovation and entrepreneurship . New York: Harper &Row. Elam, E. L. R., & Spotts, H. E. (2004). Achieving marketing curriculum integration: a live case study approach. Journal of Marketing Education, 26 (1), 50 e65. Fayolle, A., Gailly, B., & Lassas-Clerc, N. (2006). Assessing the impact of entrepreneurship education programmes: a new methodology. Journal of European Industrial Training, 30 ,7 0 1e720. Feinstein, A. H., Mann, S., & Corsun, D. L. (2002). Charting the experiential territory: clarifying de ﬁnitions and uses of computer simulation, games, and role play. Journal of Management Development, 21 (10), 732 e744.R. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 45
Fiet, J. O. (2001). The pedagogical side of entrepreneurship theory. Journal of Business Venturing, 16 (2), 101 e117. Florin, J., Karri, R., & Rossiter, N. (2007). Fostering entrepreneurial drive in business education: an attitudinal approach. Journal of Management Education, 31(1), 17 e42. Freeman, M. (2012). To adopt or not to adopt innovation: a case study of team-based learning. The International Journal of Management Education, 10 (3), 155e168. Frontczak, N. T., & Kelly, C. A. (2000). Special issue on experiential learning in marketing education. Journal of Marketing Education, 22 (1), 3e4. Gasse, Y. (1982). Elaborations on the psychology of the entrepreneur. In D. Sexton, & J. Kasarda (Eds.), The state of the art of entrepreneurship (pp. 57 e71). Boston: PWS-Kent . Gelderen, M. van, Brand, M., Praag, M. van, Bodewes, W., Poutsma, E., & Van Gils, A. (2008). Explaining entrepreneurial intentions by means of the theo ry of planned behaviour. Career Development International, 13 (6), 538 e559. Gibb, A. (2002). In pursuit of a new ‘enterprise ’and ‘entrepreneurship ’paradigm for learning: creative destruction, new values, new ways of doing things and new combinations of knowledge. International Journal of Management Reviews, 4 (3), 233 e269. Gokhale, A. (1995). Collaborative learning enhances critical thinking. Journal of Technology Education, 7 (1), 22 e30. Grimley, M., Green, R., Nilsen, T., Thompson, D., & Tomes, R. (2011). Using computer games for instruction: the student experience. Active Learning in Higher Education, 12 (1), 45 e56. Gundry, L. K., Ofstein, L. F., & Kickul, J. R. (2014). Seeing around corners: how creativity skills in entrepreneurship education in ﬂuence innovation in business. The International Journal of Management Education, 12 (3), 529 e538. Hansen, R. S. (2006). Bene ﬁts and problems with student teams: suggestions for improving team projects. Journal of Education for Business, 82 (1), 11 e19. Harris, M., Gibson, S., & Taylor, S. (2007).
Journal of Education for Business, 82 (1), 11 e19. Harris, M., Gibson, S., & Taylor, S. (2007). Examining the impact of small business Institute participation on entrepreneurial attitudes. Journal of Small Business Strategy, 18 (2), 57 e75. Hynes, B., & Richardson, I. (2007). Entrepreneurship education: a mechanism for engaging and exchanging with the small business sector. Education þTraining, 49 (8/9), 732 e744. Jack, S. L., & Anderson, A. R. (1999). Entrepreneurship education within the enterprise culture: producing re ﬂective practitioners. International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour &Research, 5 (3), 110 e125. Johnson, R. T., & Johnson, D. W. (1986). Action research: cooperative learning in the science classroom. Science and Children, 24 (2), 31 e32. Jones, C., & English, J. (2004). A contemporary approach to entrepreneurship education. Education þTraining, 46 (8/9), 416 e423. Jones, B., & Iredale, N. (2010). Enterprise education as pedagogy. Education þTraining, 52 (1), 7e19. Karlsson, T., & Moberg, K. (2013). Improving perceived entrepreneurial abilities through education: exploratory testing of an entrepreneurial se lf efﬁcacy scale in a pre epost setting. The International Journal of Management Education, 11 (1), 1e11. Karns, G. L. (2005). An update of marketing student perceptions of learning activities: structure, preferences, and effectiveness. Journal of Marketing Ed- ucation, 27 (2), 163 e171. Kerr, N. L. (1983). Motivation losses in small groups: a social dilemma analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45 (4), 819 e828. Knight, J. K., & Wood, W. B. (2005). Teaching more by lecturing less. Cell Biology Education, 4 (4), 298 e310. Kolb, A., & Kolb, D. (2009). Experiential learning theory: a dynamic holistic approach to management learning, education and development. In S. J. Armstrong, & C. Fukami (Eds.), Handbook of management learning, education and development (pp. 42 e68). London: Sage Publications . Kolb, D. (1984).
learning, education and development (pp. 42 e68). London: Sage Publications . Kolb, D. (1984). Experiential learning . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall . Krueger, N. F., Jr. (2000). The cognitive infrastructure of opportunity emergence. Entrepreneurship Theory &Practice, 24 (3), 9e27. Kumar, M. (2007). Explaining entrepreneurial success: a conceptual model. Academy of Entrepreneurship Journal, 15 (1), 57 e77. Kuratko, D. F. (2005). The emergence of entrepreneurship education: development, trends, and challenges. Entrepreneurship Theory &Practice, 29 (5), 577e597. Latane, B. (1973). A theory of social impact . St, Louis, Mo.: Psychonomic Society . Lean, J., Moizer, J., Towler, M, & Abbey, C. (2006). Simulations and games use and barriers in higher education. Active Learning in Higher Education, 7 (3), 227e242. Louw, L., Eeden, S. M. van, Bosch, J. K., & Venter, D. J. L. (2003). Entrepreneurial traits of undergraduate students at selected South African tertiar y in- stitutions. International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour &Research, 9 (1), 5e26. Lumpkin, G. T., & Dess, G. G. (1996). Clarifying the entrepreneurial orientation construct and linking it to performance. Academy of Management Review, 21(1), 135 e172. Lumpkin, G. T., & Dess, G. G. (2001). Linking two dimensions of entrepreneurial orientation to ﬁrm performance: the moderating role of the environment and industry life cycle. Journal of Business Venturing, 16 (5), 429 e451. Mahajan, A. (2012). An experiential approach to developing a pay structure: insights from teaching compensation management. The International Journal of Management Education, 10 (1), 2e11. Makienko, I., & Bernard, E. K. (2012). Teaching applied value of marketing research: a questionnaire design project. The International Journal of Management Education, 10 (2), 139 e145. Man, T. W. Y. (2006). Exploring the behavioural patterns of entrepreneurial learning: a competency approach. Education þTraining, 48 (5), 309 e321. Masters, R.,
learning: a competency approach. Education þTraining, 48 (5), 309 e321. Masters, R., & Meier, R. (1988). Sex differences and risk-taking propensity of entrepreneurs. Journal of Small Business Management, 26 (1), 31 e35. Mezirow, J. (1990). Fostering critical re ﬂection in adulthood . San Francisco: CA: Jossey-Bass . Miller, D. (1983). The correlates of entrepreneurship in three types of ﬁrms. Management Science, 29 (7), 770 e791. Naman, J. L., & Slevin, D. P. (1993). Entrepreneurship and the concept of ﬁt: a model and empirical tests. Strategic Management Journal, 14 (2), 137 e153. Oakley, B., Brent, R., Felder, R. M, & Elhajj, I. (2004). Turning student groups into effective teams. Journal of Student Centered Learning, 2 (1), 9e34. Oosterbeek, H., van Praag, M., & Ijsselstein, A. (2010). The impact of entrepreneurship education on entrepreneurship skills and motivation. European Economic Review, 54 (3), 442 e454. Ormrod, J. E. (2008). Human learning . Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson . Patel, N. V. (2003). A holistic approach to learning and teaching interaction: factors in the development of critical learners. The International Journal of Educational Management, 17 (6), 272 e284. Piaget, J. (1950). The psychology of intelligence . London: Routledge . Piercy, N. (2013). Evaluating experiential learning in the business context: contributions to group-based and cross-functional working. Innovations in Education and Teaching International, 50 (2), 202 e213. Piercy, N., & Caldwell, N. (2011). Experiential learning in the international classroom: supporting learning effectiveness and integration. The International Journal of Management Education, 9 (2), 25 e35. de Pillis, E., & Reardon, K. K. (2007). The in ﬂuence of personality traits and persuasive messages on entrepreneurial intention: a cross-cultural comparison. Career Development International, 12 (4), 382 e396. Platzer, H., Snelling, J., & Blake, D. (1997). Promoting re ﬂective practitioners in nursing: a
Platzer, H., Snelling, J., & Blake, D. (1997). Promoting re ﬂective practitioners in nursing: a review of theoretical models and research into the use of diaries and journals to facilitate re ﬂection. Teaching in Higher Education, 2 (2), 103 e121. Prince, M. (2004). Does active learning work? A review of the research. Journal of Engineering Education, 93 (3), 223 e231. Pruett, M., Shinnar, R., Toney, B, Llopis, F., & Fox, J. (2009). Explaining entrepreneurial intentions of university students: a cross-cultural stu dy.International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour &Research, 15 (6), 571 e594. Rasmussen, E. A., & Sørheim, R. (2006). Action-based entrepreneurship education. Technovation, 26 (2), 185 e194. Rauch, A., Wiklund, J., Lumpkin, G. T, & Frese, M. (2009). Entrepreneurial orientation and business performance: an assessment of past research and suggestions for the future. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 33 (3), 761 e787.R. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 46
Rhem, J. (1998). Problem-based learning: an introduction. The National Teaching &Learning Forum, 8 (1), 1e4. Robinson, P. B., Stimpson, D. V., Huefner, J. C, & Hunt, H. K. (1991). An attitude approach to the prediction of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 15 (4), 13 e30. Ross, S. (2011). Focused active learning to improve organizational performance. International Journal of Management Education, 9 (4), 39 e49. Ruben, B. D. (1999). Simulations, games, and experience-based learning: the quest for a new paradigm for teaching and learning. Simulation &Gaming, 30(4), 498 e505. Schumpeter, J. A. (1942). Capitalism socialism and democracy . London: Allen &Unwin . Sesen, H. (2013). Personality or environment? A comprehensive study on the entrepreneurial intentions of university students. Education þTraining, 55 (7), 624e640. Shane, S., Locke, E. A., & Collins, C. J. (2003). Entrepreneurial motivation. Human Resource Management Review, 13 (2), 257 e279. Sherman, P. S., Sebora, T., & Digman, L. A. (2008). Experiential entrepreneurship in the classroom: effects of teaching methods on entrepreneurial c areer choice intentions. Journal of Entrepreneurship Education, 11 ,2 9e42. Simon, B., & Hamilton, D. L. (1994). Self-stereotyping and social context: the effects of relative in-group size and in-group status. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66 (4), 699 e711. Snyder, K. D. (2003). Ropes, poles, and space active learning in business education. Active Learning in Higher Education, 4 (2), 159 e167. Solomon, G. (2008). Entrepreneurship education in the United States. In J. Potter (Ed.), Entrepreneurship and higher education (pp. 95 e118). Paris: OECD and LEED . Stewart, W. H., & Roth, P. L. (2004). Data quality affects meta-analytic conclusions: a response to Miner and Raju (2004) concerning entrepreneurial risk propensity. The Journal of Applied Psychology, 89 (1), 14 e21. Stewart, W. H., Watson, W. E., Carland, J. C., & Carland, J. W. (1999). A
89 (1), 14 e21. Stewart, W. H., Watson, W. E., Carland, J. C., & Carland, J. W. (1999). A proclivity for entrepreneurship: a comparison of entrepreneurs, small busine ss owners, and corporate managers. Journal of Business Venturing, 14 (2), 189 e214. Taatila, V., & Down, S. (2012). Measuring entrepreneurial orientation of university students. Education þTraining, 54 (8/9), 744 e760. Tang, J. T., Tang, Z., Marino, L. D, Zhang, Y., & Li, Q. (2008). Exploring an inverted U-shape relationship between entrepreneurial orientation and pe rformance in Chinese ventures. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 32 (1), 219 e239. Timmons, J., Gillin, L. M., Burshtein, S. L, & Spinelli, S. (2011). New venture creation: Entrepreneurship for the 21st century: A Paci ﬁc Rim perspective . Sydney: McGraw-Hill . Tsay, M., & Brady, M. (2012). A case study of cooperative learning and communication pedagogy: does working in teams make a difference? Journal of the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 10 (2), 78 e89. Van der Sijde, P., Ridder, A., Blaauw, G, & Diensberg, C. (2008). Teaching entrepreneurship: Cases for education and training . Heidelberg: Physica-Verlag . Von Graevenitz, G., Harhoff, D., & Weber, R. (2010). The effects of entrepreneurship education. Journal of Economic Behavior &Organization, Special Issue: Experimental Methods in Entrepreneurship Research, 76 (1), 90 e112. Wiklund, J. (1999). The sustainability of the entrepreneurial orientation performance relationship. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 24 ,3 7e48. Wilson, K. (2008). Entrepreneurship education in Europe. In J. Potter (Ed.), Entrepreneurship and higher education (pp. 119 e138). Paris: OECD and LEED . Zahra, S. A., & Welter, F. (2008). Entrepreneurship education for Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe. In J. Potter (Ed.), Entrepreneurship and higher education (pp. 165 e192). Paris: OECD and LEED . Zhao, H., Seibert, S. E., & Hills, G. E. (2005). The mediating role of self-ef ﬁcacy in the
LEED . Zhao, H., Seibert, S. E., & Hills, G. E. (2005). The mediating role of self-ef ﬁcacy in the development of entrepreneurial intentions. Journal of Applied Psy- chology, 90 (6), 1265 e1272 . Dr Robin Bell joined the Worcester Business School in 2011 and works as a Senior Lecturer within the Marketing subject group, specializing in entrepre- neurship and enterprise development. He is also the School's Director of International Partnerships.R. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 47
Developing the next generation of entrepreneurs: Giving students the opportunity to gain experience and thrive Robin Bell Worcester Business School, University of Worcester, UK article info Article history: Received 20 July 2014Received in revised form 6 December 2014 Accepted 11 December 2014 Available online 6 January 2015 Keywords: Entrepreneurship education Experiential learningEntrepreneurial traitsabstract Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) have increasingly utilized experiential approaches in business education; however, some researchers have suggested that further research is required to investigate the effectiveness and student reaction to such approaches. The aimof this study is to determine the impact of an experiential learning approach on theperceived development of entrepreneurial traits and to measure the level of both student engagement and satisfaction. The approach was designed and tested during a Higher National Diploma (HND) entrepreneurship module in a British HEI. Traditional taughtsessions were blended with applied activities that required students to utilize the skills they learned to complete steps of the activities, which increased in length and complexity. Results found both a high level of student satisfaction and engagement and the belief thatthe module's experiential approach had, in many instances, helped to develop entrepre- neurial traits. Successful practice and modi ﬁcations are discussed. ©2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 1. Introduction Within the last two decades, higher education has seen considerable growth in both the development of entrepreneurship as a subject and in the number of entrepreneurship courses offered. Entrepreneurship courses are mainly found in business schools within higher education institutions (HEIs) ( Collins, Smith, &Hannon, 2006 ), and are often taught alongside tradi- tional business disciplines, including management, marketing and ﬁnance. Entrepreneurship education can be de ﬁned as the
including management, marketing and ﬁnance. Entrepreneurship education can be de ﬁned as the development of attitudes, behaviours, and capabilities that can be applied during an individual's career as an entrepreneur (Wilson, 2008 ). However, entrepreneurship is a complex phenomenon that requires decision making across all aspects of business activity in situations where there are high levels of uncertainty in a global and dynamic socio-technical context (Timmons, Gillin, Burshtein, &Spinelli, 2011 ). This has led to considerable debate in the literature regarding the most appropriate teaching methods to develop entrepreneurial knowledge and stimulate learning ( Balan&Metcalfe, 2012 ). Past research has suggested that the success of entrepreneurship education has been mixed, with some research reporting positive outcomes (e.g. Athayde, 2009; Fayolle, Gailly, &Lassas-Clerc, 2006 ;Karlsson &Moberg, 2013 ), and other research reporting less favourable outcomes (e.g. Von Graevenitz, Harhoff, &Weber, 2010; Oosterbeek, van Praag, &Ijsselstein, 2010 ). The lack of consistency in the ﬁndings may be due, in part, to methodological weaknesses. It may also be attributed to a general lack of agreement on a conceptual model for the analysis of entrepreneurial education ( Von Graevenitz et al., 2010 ). Academic support has been increasing for the use of non-traditional higher education learning environments in the study of entrepreneurship ( Gibb, 2002; Jones &English, 2004 ). As a result, many entrepreneurship educators have adopted E-mail address: r.bell@worc.ac.uk . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect The International Journal of Management Education journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijme http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijme.2014.12.002 1472-8117/ ©2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47
approaches based on Kolb's experiential learning cycle ( Kolb, 1984 ), which draws on earlier works that emphasize the central role experience plays in learning and development ( Dewey, 1963; Piaget, 1950 ) to develop a dynamic, holistic model of an experience-based learning process ( Kolb&Kolb, 2009 ). This approach departs from traditional lecturer-led passive learning, increasing the emphasis on action-orientated or active experiential learning, problem solving, project-based learning and peer evaluation. This has led to a wide range of new active and creative problem solving and learning by doing experiential approaches being adopted. New approaches have included business simulations, meeting and interviewing entrepreneurs, developing business plans, and attending entrepreneurship forums. Piercy (2013) argues however, that while experiential approaches have become an increasingly favoured form of pedagogy for business educators, student reactions to experiential approaches require further investigation. The qualitative research herein builds on previous research by exploring how experiential learning in an applied setting supports the development of four key entrepreneurial behaviours or characteristics. The teaching approach required par- ticipants to be actively involved in planning, developing, and implementing two student-led events. The students then re- ported via re ﬂective essays on how, and whether, the four key behaviours had been utilized, and how they could have been used and developed further. Additional qualitative feedback was collected through a series of interviews. Finally, students' module evaluations were analyzed to discern student satisfaction with these experiential approaches. 2. Literature review 2.1. Active and experiential learning The development of students' critical thinking skills is one of the main goals of higher education. This encourages the movement beyond knowledge comprehension and towards the higher order skills of --- This encourages the movement beyond knowledge comprehension and towards the higher order skills of analysis, synthesis and evaluation (Bloom, Engelhart, Furst, Hill, &Krathwohl, 1956 ). The core elements of active learning are student activity and student engagement in the learning process, in contrast to traditional lecture formats where content is passively transmitted from thelecturer to the students ( Prince, 2004 ). In this process, active learning should involve the use of the higher order thinking skills of analysis, synthesis and evaluation. In the past, it has been argued that higher education institutions have done little to foster active learning aimed at developing the critical thinking and creativity of business students. As a result, corporations have reported that entry-level graduates have been lacking in these skills ( Snyder, 2003 ). Business schools have increased their focus on developing the skills required for business, marketing and entrepre- neurship, and instructors are exploring new and inventive ways to introduce active and experiential approaches that can help to prepare students for their future careers. Experiential learning can be described as a participatory form of learning that involves participants in using a range of mental processes to synthesize information in an active and immersive environment (Feinstein, Mann, &Corsun, 2002 ). Kolb (1984, p. 6) described the importance of participants being “able to involve themselves fully, openly, and without bias in new experiences; they must be able to observe and re ﬂect on these experiences from many perspectives; they must be able to create concepts that integrate their observations into logically sound theories; and they must be able to use these theories to make decisions and solve problems ”. Experiential Learning Theory has had a major impact on both the design and delivery of educational programmes in management training and development, and formal management education (
of educational programmes in management training and development, and formal management education ( Kolb&Kolb, 2009 ). Many business school edu- cators have accordingly adopted approaches based on Kolb's (1984) experiential learning cycle to develop a dynamic, holistic model of an experience-based learning process. It is a process through which knowledge is created through the transformation of experience ( Kolb, 1984 , p. 41), and as such involves an active interpretation of experience. Re ﬂection is an important element in this approach and structured approaches to the re ﬂective stage can enhance this process ( Platzer, Snelling, &Blake, 1997 ). As academic literature has increasingly recognized the value of non-traditional higher education learning environments (emphasizing action-orientated experiential learning), new approaches have been introduced within the HEI system to reap the bene ﬁts of experiential learning. It has been argued that such active learning approaches address many of traditional teaching approaches' limitations ( Caldwell, 2007; Knight &Wood, 2005; Lean, Moizer, Towler, &Abbey, 2006; Mahajan, 2012; Makienko &Bernard, 2012; Ruben, 1999 ), and generally result in improved knowledge retention, increased problem solving skills and increased motivation for future learning ( Bonwell &Eison, 1991; Rhem, 1998; Snyder, 2003 ). Importantly, it has been argued that whilst lectures are a useful vehicle for imparting knowledge, they do not lead to thought or attitude adjustment and the development of behavioural skills or inspire interest in the subject ( Grimley, Green, Nilsen, Thompson, & Tomes, 2011 ). However, active engagement in an activity together with enjoyment of the experience can signi ﬁcantly increase both motivation and learning ( Elam&Spotts, 2004; Karns, 2005 ). It is, perhaps, not surprising that active experiential learning approaches are increasingly being introduced into syllabi to supplement traditional teaching formats ( Daly,
are increasingly being introduced into syllabi to supplement traditional teaching formats ( Daly, 2001; Karns, 2005; Piercy, 2013 ). While studies on student satisfaction with experiential learning are varied, Piercy and Caldwell (2011) found, in a multicultural study, that students reported high levels of satisfaction with experiential learning. 2.2. Working within groups Working within groups on a project provides a forum for experiential learning, enabling a student-centred focus in the classroom that creates an active learning experience ( Patel, 2003 ). A cooperative learning experience can enhance studentR. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 38
success by enabling students to share understanding and support one another. It may increase student motivation, as stu- dents may feel a sense of accountability ( Ormrod, 2008 ).Tsay and Brady (2012) found that involvement in cooperative learning is a positive predictor of academic performance. Johnson and Johnson (1986) found that students involved in cooperative learning retained information for longer and achieved higher levels of thought than their peers who worked alone. Students have also been shown to develop their higher-order critical thinking skills as a result of cooperative learning (Gokhale, 1995 ). 2.3. Entrepreneurial education It is now generally accepted that entrepreneurship, or at least certain facets of it, can be taught and that entrepreneurship is not limited only to those who are born with certain skills, characteristics and attributes ( Drucker, 1985; Kuratko, 2005; Robinson, Stimpson, Huefner, &Hunt, 1991 ). Entrepreneurship is often taught in business schools alongside traditional management disciplines. As a result, educators may use different teaching approaches that are based on the learning ob- jectives and the requirements of students ( Van der Sijde, Ridder, Blaauw, &Diensberg, 2008 ). Traditional management education can be regarded as being positivistic in nature whilst the entrepreneurial process requires a plethora of skills and is idiosyncratic in its nature ( Jack&Anderson,1999 ). The entrepreneurial process involves the creation of something, often using new processes or techniques, in order to extract value ( Schumpeter, 1942 ). It is based on opportunity recognition and is necessarily an inductive process, usually involving varying degrees of risk and uncertainty (Jack&Anderson, 1999 ). This type of education and learning requires exposure to and engagement in the often complex stages of the entrepreneurial process, which requires a different learning environment within the higher education setting (Gibb, 2002; Jones
requires a different learning environment within the higher education setting (Gibb, 2002; Jones &English, 2004 ). This involves a departure from traditional lecturer-led passive learning towards an increased emphasis on action-orientated, experiential learning, problem solving, project-based learning and peer evaluation. Zahra and Welter (2008, p. 188) have argued, “Entrepreneurial skills are learned in a variety of ways and methods. Some entrepreneurial skills are best learnt by doing and observing others. Whilst lecture based education has its place in the curriculum, the training of future entrepreneurs should also include interactive and action orientated methods. ” It has been argued that entrepreneurship education can develop new entrepreneurial skills by including real-life expe- riences ( Arvanites, Glasgow, Klingler, &Stumpf, 2006 ).Jones and Iredale (2010) suggested that entrepreneurship education requires experiential learning styles, creative problem solving and learning by doing in order to engage students. This approach departs from the traditional lecturer-led passive learning, towards a greater emphasis on action-orientated, experiential learning, problem solving, and project-based learning style of teaching ( Jones&English, 2004 ). Support has also been expressed for action-orientated learning by doing activities in group or network contexts ( Rasmussen &Sørheim, 2006 ), and for student led approaches ( Fiet, 2001 ). Some educators have argued for the implementation of experiential approaches such as meeting and interviewing entrepreneurs, developing business plans, and attending entrepreneurship forums ( Sherman, Sebora, &Digman, 2008 ), computer simulations, business visits, and relevant and realistic class exercises (Solomon, 2008 ). Other approaches have included social enterprise placements, case study workshops ( Bevan &Kipka, 2012 ), and involvement in business consulting initiatives ( Hynes &Richardson, 2007 ).Bevan and Kipka (2012)
involvement in business consulting initiatives ( Hynes &Richardson, 2007 ).Bevan and Kipka (2012) suggest that the most commonly adopted experiential learning formats in business schools include team building exercises, simulations, guest speakers and internships. 2.4. Key entrepreneurial characteristics Entrepreneurial education can be viewed broadly in terms of both the skills that can be taught and in the characteristics that can be encouraged and developed in individuals ( Jones&English, 2004 ). Three of the most widely studied and discussed entrepreneurial behaviours or characteristics in the entrepreneurship literature are those of innovativeness, the willingness to take risks, and proactiveness (e.g. Covin &Slevin, 1989; Lumpkin & Dess,1996; Wiklund,1999 ). Based on Miller's (1983) conceptualization, these three dimensions have been identi ﬁed and used consistently as a measure of the ‘entrepreneurial orientation ’of organizations ( Rauch, Wiklund, Lumpkin, &Frese, 2009 ), which has emerged as a major construct within the strategic management and entrepreneurship literature over the last twenty years ( Tang, Tang, Marino, Zhang, &Li, 2008 ). Developed into a measurement instrument by Covin and Slevin (1989) , to measure the entrepreneurial orientation of organizations, these behaviours have more recently been used to measure entrepreneurial orientation at an academic level (e.g. Bolton &Lane, 2012; Taatila &Down, 2012 ).Bolton and Lane (2012) developed a measurement instrument based on these three dimensions to measure the entrepreneurial orientation of in- dividual university students, which was found to correlate with entrepreneurial intention. This research will focus on these three characteristics, together with the degree of self-ef ﬁcacy/esteem/con ﬁdence of individual students. The self-ef ﬁcacy construct has played an important part in entrepreneur motivation research ( Pruett, Shinnar, Toney, Llopis, &Fox, 2009 ) and has been widely studied as an
research ( Pruett, Shinnar, Toney, Llopis, &Fox, 2009 ) and has been widely studied as an entrepreneurial behavioural trait in both professionals and students (e.g. Florin, Karri, & Rossiter, 2007; Gelderen, Brand, &Praag, 2008 ;Harris, Gibson, &Taylor, 2007; Louw, Eeden, Bosch, &Venter, 2003; Pruett et al., 2009; Robinson et al., 1991 ). There is also much empirical evidence of the connection between perceived self- efﬁcacy and entrepreneurial intentions ( Pruett et al., 2009; Sesen, 2013 :Zhao, Seibert, &Hills, 2005 ). The four characteristics that will be used in this research are now considered brie ﬂy.R. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 39
2.4.1. Innovativeness Innovation is a constant theme within entrepreneurship literature ( Drucker, 1985; Lumpkin &Dess, 1996; Miller, 1983 ). Lumpkin and Dess (2001) deﬁned innovation in terms of developing and introducing new products and services, whilst Robinson et al. (1991) considered it in terms of perceiving and acting upon activities in new and unique ways. Innovation often involves creation or creative destruction ( Schumpeter, 1942 ).Drucker (1985) argued that innovation and entrepre- neurship go hand in hand. Gundry, Ofstein and Kickul (2014) suggested that the development of increased perceived crea- tivity during an entrepreneurship module could result in a transfer of innovative skills to the workplace. 2.4.2. Proactiveness The proactive nature of entrepreneurs has been highlighted by many researchers including Covin and Slevin (1989), Lumpkin and Dess (1996), Miller (1983) , and Naman and Slevin (1993) . Proactiveness can be considered as the opposite of reactiveness and focuses on implementation and on making things happen, using any means necessary ( Davis, Morris, & Allen, 1991 ). It may involve opportunity seeking, forward looking and anticipating the future actions of competitors (Lumpkin &Dess, 2001 ).Crant (2000) deﬁned proactive behaviour as an individual's initiative to improve on or to create entirely new circumstances. 2.4.3. Risk taking It has been argued that risk is inherently embodied in the practice of entrepreneurship; the creation of new ventures is inherently a risk-laden process ( Aldrich &Martinez, 2007 ). Evidence that entrepreneurs have a more positive attitude to- wards risk than non-entrepreneurs has been found by many researchers, including Stewart and Roth (2004), Begley and Boyd (1987), Carland, Carland, Carland, and Pearce (1995) , and Stewart, Watson, Carland, and Carland (1999) .Davis et al. (1991) highlighted that entrepreneurship involves a balance of the associated risks involved and an attempt to manage those risks.
involves a balance of the associated risks involved and an attempt to manage those risks. Denslow and Giunipero (2003) have argued that entrepreneurs are prepared to take calculated risks and can make decisions based on limited information, as they possess an on-going desire to set and obtain increasingly challenging goals. In a business setting, entrepreneurs are generally perceived as more open to risk than managers ( Masters &Meier, 1988 ) because entrepreneurs bear the ultimate responsibility for the decision ( Gasse, 1982 ). 2.4.4. Self-ef ﬁcacy Self-ef ﬁcacy (also referred to as self-con ﬁdence and self-esteem) is a belief in one's ability to successfully complete a task or attain a desired goal, and as such, is a useful construct to predict an entrepreneur's behavioural choice, level of persistence, and overall effectiveness ( Chen, Green, &Crick, 1998 ). It has been argued that differences in work interest and performance can often be linked to differences in self-ef ﬁcacy, which affects individual persistence, initiative and performance ( Krueger, 2000 ). Entrepreneurial self-ef ﬁcacy has been widely researched as one of the personality traits that motivates entrepreneurial behaviour ( Chen et al., 1998; de Pillis &Reardon, 2007 ;Karlsson &Moberg, 2013 ), and enables entrepreneurs to recognize opportunities, manage resources, and juggle the challenges of enterprise management ( Kumar, 2007; Shane, Locke, &Collins, 2003 ). There is also empirical evidence showing a connection between perceived self-ef ﬁcacy and entrepreneurial intentions (Zhao et al., 2005 ). 3. Research aim HEIs have increasingly utilized experiential approaches in business education; however, Piercy (2013) has suggested that further research is required to investigate the effectiveness and student reaction to experiential learning approaches. This paper investigates how experiential learning in an applied setting can aid the development of four key entrepreneurial behaviours identi ﬁed
in an applied setting can aid the development of four key entrepreneurial behaviours identi ﬁed above. The research identi ﬁes successful practice and seeks to explore how the approaches used in the study could be adjusted to improve students learning. Finally, this research seeks to measure the level of both student engagement and satisfaction. 4. The course and methodology 4.1. The module A new entrepreneurship Higher National Diploma (HND) module was set up at a UK HEI to provide applied ‘scaffolded ’ activities that increased in length and complexity. Twenty-nine students registered for the module, which was conducted over the course of one academic year. The module's taught content consisted of twenty weekly sessions. During the ﬁrst third of each session, the instructor presented the week's topics and discussed how the topic applied to their group activity. Afterthis, the students applied the day's lesson in small groups, which they organized themselves, as they worked towards the module's two applied activities. The information was thus presented in bite-sized pieces, with ample time for students to reﬂect and apply what they had just learned within peer groups. Guidance was available from the instructor, as needed. As the semester progressed, students were given greater autonomy and less guidance as they developed their entrepreneurial skills. Structured re ﬂection was built into the applied activities to help students question, make sense of, and come to a better understanding of what had taken place ( Mezirow, 1990; Platzer et al., 1997; Ross, 2011 ). In short, the module provided theR. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 40
basic knowledge about entrepreneurial skills via traditional lectures, experiential opportunities to set up and run a venture, and post-activity re ﬂection on the decisions made and actions taken, allowing learners to identify the areas of strength and weakness, as well as developments made through the module. 4.2. Applied activity 1: pop-up shop Students were assigned the task of organizing a pop-up shop in the city's main shopping centre. The instructor gave students the objective of using the shop to promote the University facilities, focussing on its aspects that could be enjoyed by the public, e.g., the library, sports teams, and museum. Students organized themselves in groups of ﬁve, planned their event, and set performance objectives. Each group identi ﬁed the resources they would need for their shop, with the instructor providing suggestions. After the pop-up shops, students re ﬂected on the activity and made presentations to their classmates outlining their successes, changes they made during the event, and what they would have done differently. 4.3. Applied activity 2: social event Students organized and managed a theme-night event for university students. Less structure was provided for this activity, and students groups were challenged to apply their learning to make their event pro ﬁtable. For example, groups performed market research during the design phase of their enterprise. The groups composed individual business plans that detailed the management, marketing, and ﬁnancing of the theme night. They then worked with the instructor to procure resources and with the venue manager to coordinate logistics. Groups carried out their events on consecutive Monday nights at the HEI Student Union. 4.4. Student assessment Students were assessed at three stages of the module. The ﬁrst assessment was the group presentation following the pop- up shop. For the second assessment, the instructor evaluated the business plans students developed for the social event for
assessment, the instructor evaluated the business plans students developed for the social event for suitability and professionalism, as well as its enactment. Students wrote an essay for the third assessment in which they critically re ﬂected on the module and discussed how the taught content and the applied activities developed their entre- preneurial traits and behaviours. Entrepreneurial behaviours and traits were discussed throughout the module and students were thus prepared to re ﬂect on these by the time they composed their essays. In addition, they were asked what changes could be introduced to make the experiential learning more effective in developing the entrepreneurial traits. Feedback was available throughout the module and after each assessment. The planned learning and teaching activities and assessments were aligned with the intended learning outcomes, in line with Biggs' (1996) work on constructive alignment. The activities and assessments were thus designed to enable students to construct their own learning. A breakdown of the intended learning outcomes and the module assessments are displayed inTable 1 . 4.5. Methodology The re ﬂective essays students composed at the end of the module were thematically analyzed to determine if and how the activities and sessions had helped to support and develop their entrepreneurial outlooks. Thematic analysis offered a ﬂexible approach to identify reoccurring themes. It provided a top-down perspective to identify and explore how the students' key entrepreneurial characteristics were developed through their experience. A total of twenty seven complete re ﬂective essays were used for the thematic analysis. This was supplemented by one-to-one feedback from fourteen of the students, as part of Table 1 Intended learning outcomes &module assessments. Intended learning outcomes To be able to: 1. Understand and apply market research in the formulation of a business venture idea. 2. Assess the key resources and --- market research in the formulation of a business venture idea. 2. Assess the key resources and capabilities required to launch a new venture.3. Demonstrate effective presentation skills and business plan development.4. Understand and apply entrepreneurial skills to the development and enactment of a new venture.5. Identify and critically analyze the application and development of entrepreneurial skills. Summative module assessment Intended learning outcome assessed Assignment 1 epop-up shop Pop-up shop re ﬂection presentation 2, 3 Assignment 2 esocial event Development of a business plan for the proposed event; Enactment of the proposed event1, 2, 3, 4 Assignment 3 ecritical re ﬂection Critical re ﬂective analysis of entrepreneurial skill development 5R. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 41
theﬁnal semester review process. Additional feedback and comments about the module were also collected via the standard university module evaluation process. 5. Results The data collected was thematically analyzed using a top down approach, using the four key entrepreneurial character- istics previously identi ﬁed and discussed earlier for classi ﬁcation. In addition, the student feedback and perceptions of the module were identi ﬁed and discussed. Each entrepreneurial characteristic is considered in terms of how successful the experiential learning approach was in developing the individual characteristic, what was successful within the experientiallearning tasks, and what adjustments could be made to improve the learning from the students' perspective. 5.1. Preference for innovation Almost all students reported that they had a better understanding of the importance of innovation and creativity in the business process as a result of completing the module. Some students reported an increased awareness of the bene ﬁts that being open to change could provide. “For the event night, we did not make a pro ﬁt; I think if we had spent more time being innovative, we could have done better .” “The activities helped me understand the importance of being innovative and better understand what I can do to keep improving myself to be more innovative .” The data highlighted that the tasks in class, wherein students needed to generate innovative business ideas for their enterprises, had helped students understand and appreciate the basis of innovation and how innovative ideas could be constructed. Also, the ﬁrst enterprise that the students ran (the pop-up shop) had encouraged innovation and making changes “on their feet. ”The time-bound nature of the task meant that many of the groups had to make changes to their strategies and approaches during the running of their pop-up shop in order to engage different customers: “I would have not gone out of my comfort zone this way, if not
order to engage different customers: “I would have not gone out of my comfort zone this way, if not for the Pop-Up Shop …… I became open to new ways to gain people's attention and became more con ﬁdent ” Students also re ﬂected that the time-bound pressure of the second enterprise encouraged them to adopt creative and innovative approaches to planning, advertising and running the event: “Using Facebook to communicate with other group members helped me to be more open to different ways of communicating within a group …… I found I enjoyed it .” “The use of social media to advertise our event was very effective and reduced the loss of time advertising the event .” Students indicated that having to compete with other bars and venues while running their social event forced them to think of innovative ideas in order to offer something different and/or target a different segment in order to make the event a success: “I felt compelled to come up with ideas that local venues had not already come up with .” “The event night required us to think on our feet and come up with new ideas along the way as we were planning .” Students highlighted that the size of the groups had a limiting impact on innovation; in some cases, students felt embarrassed to present their ‘innovative ’ideas to the other group members. It was suggested that smaller groups would allow greater involvement of the individual members and would allow for increased participation in the decision making. Although group learning can be bene ﬁcial to weaker students by providing peer support to increase their self-esteem and facilitate their learning ( Crooks, 1988 ), certain student groupings may still ﬁnd it dif ﬁcult to participate in active engagement. Smaller groups may be more advantageous ( Kerr, 1983 ), although this would require greater organization and greater funding. It was also highlighted that activities allowing students to consider existing products/services and discussions of the innovative --- It was widely reported that the two enterprises made students think and plan ahead in order to make the arrangements, order the materials required, and market the events. For example, one group polled their peers to gauge interest in different event night themes to ensure students would be interested in attending. Students also widely reported that working within groups increased their perceived accountability, which increased their proactiveness, as many of the students did not want to let their group down. Students reported that increased competition between the groups and incentives would have increased the motivation and further encouraged their proactiveness. This is an interesting point; the creation of speci ﬁc goals along with a sense of competition can create student engagement with an activity ( Ahamer, 2004 ). Whilst the students were divided into two groups for the second event, competition between the two groups was not actively encouraged. This is an element that could be considered for future such modules. A reoccurring theme emerged that students felt if they had seen business plans previously produced by other students for similar activities, they would have understood the complexity and expectations of the enterprises. Students felt these ex- amples would have helped them act more proactively. However, the goal of the exercise was to allow the students free reign and not restrict or direct them, instead allowing them to ﬁnd their own way to apply the taught principles. Entrepreneurial learning involves not only avoiding the mistakes of others and repeating what others have successfully done in the past, but an active interpretation of experience by the learner ( Man, 2006 ). It is debateable whether students would learn more with a format to reference or whether this would restrict their ideas and creativity. 5.3. Self-ef ﬁcacy Self-ef ﬁcacy was the most widely reported entrepreneurial behaviour to be developed through the course of the module.
allowing students to consider existing products/services and discussions of the innovative changes/developments could be introduced to provide examples of different bases of innovation. Looking at SME case studies was also highlighted as a way students believed their innovation skills could be improved. This could be introduced as part of the course material either before or during the module. 5.2. Proactive disposition The in ﬂuence of the module on students' proactive disposition was mixed. Some students felt that they were already proactive and the module did little to develop it further. Other students reported that the module made them aware that theyneeded to be more proactive to be successful at the applied activities. Students reported that: “This set back in the event has allowed me to reconsider how proactive I actually am .” “I had the opportunities to be proactive but did not take them .”R. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 42
most widely reported entrepreneurial behaviour to be developed through the course of the module. Almost all students reported an increase in entrepreneurial con ﬁdence after completing the two enterprises, leading to a sense of achievement and worthiness. An increased con ﬁdence in self-promotion was also widely reported upon completion of the module. This came from completing several activities throughout the course of the module, including presenting and pitching ideas, overcoming setbacks and challenges, being part of a group, and developing and running an event from scratch. Comments included: “At the end of the event my self-ef ﬁcacy had dramatically increased as I did not believe we would be able to pull off an event as big as this one .” “I took more leadership than I ever have before and that gave me the skills needed to be successful and con ﬁdent for the event night .” “Presenting individually to my peers is good practice for a future career in business .” Suggestions as to how students' self-ef ﬁcacy could be improved further were largely based on increased individual accountability. It was suggested that this could have drawn out quieter members of the group, who were at the periphery of the activities. One suggestion was that students should present their ideas individually, and individual tasks could have been delegated not within the group, but by the instructor. Another suggestion was to have the instructor assign group members, rather than allowing the students to choose their own groups. Students believed this would have taken students out of their comfort zones and developed individual self-ef ﬁcacy. All of these suggestions could easily be incorporated in future modules. Indeed, Oakley, Brent, Felder, and Elhajj (2004) stresses the importance of forming effective groups, as it allows for students to gain improved communication skills and the ability to learn at a deeper level. Hansen (2006) argues that instructor organized groups are more --- enjoyed and appreciated the independence the module offered, other students would have preferred more structure and guidance on setting up the enterprises. Some students found the module and assignments were unstructured comparedto what they were used to. In a traditional lecture environment, instructors present concepts in a straightforward manner; however, the aim of the module was to encourage students to take control of their learning ( Freeman, 2012 ), their decisions, and to create a need for them to be proactive while completing tasks. Based on the student re ﬂections, many were happy with the arrangements and felt they rose to the occasion. However, some students found this more challenging, and some suggested they had deliberately sought to bene ﬁt from others' work (so-called freeloading). This led some students to suggest that more individual accountability would be useful through individual assessments. Other cited problems included lack of attendance to student arranged meetings, which resulted in delayed decision-making that affected their timelines. Many of these concerns can be addressed by reducing the size of the groups, although this may involve more organization and have cost implications and may require more of the instructors' resources. Latane's social impact theory ( 1973 ), suggests that as group size increases, pressure on the individual diminishes, and the effect of individual non-contribution on the group decreases. Kerr (1983) argued that group size has a direct effect on the motivation of individual group members, with increasing group size contributing to episodes of social loa ﬁng, decreasing individual motivation. Simon and Hamilton (1994) suggest that a four-member group is optimal, as it will increase an individual's accountability while allowing for adequate division of responsibilities. Davies (2009) mirrored this contention, ﬁnding that forming groups of three to four students allowed for better delegation of work and better
ability to learn at a deeper level. Hansen (2006) argues that instructor organized groups are more effective than randomized group formations. Interestingly, the feedback seemed to suggest that self-ef ﬁcacy was a driver for some of the other dimensions. One example was: “Due to the various activities on the module, my con ﬁdence has been enhanced and I now have a stronger belief in my ability to complete tasks, demonstrate my abilities and not be afraid to be innovative .” 5.4. Attitude to risk taking Many of the students found that their attitude towards risk had changed signi ﬁcantly. It was apparent that many of the students had never considered entrepreneurial risk taking and the enterprise activities had helped them to re ﬂect on the beneﬁts of taking calculated risks. “I am more likely to take risks now …… I now see risk taking as more positive than negative .” “I learnt that risks can bring rewards and they can be calculated to be an asset to an entrepreneur .” “I always thought risk was a bad thing. I am now much more open to take risks as long as I have some base of information that offers less probability of failing .” Organizing and carrying out the events entailed ongoing decision-making, and this was a new experience for many students, particularly those who previously had not been involved in assessing risk and making decisions. A reoccurringR. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 43
theme which came out of the data was that students had an increased realization that running a business didn't involve taking just one risk, but rather a series of interlinked decisions were required in order to balance risk. “How to allocate our budget, and what to buy etc. involved a lot of risk but we were able to calculate them, so they paid off .” After re ﬂection, students suggested that other activities which might help develop their attitudes and approach to risk included speaking with real life entrepreneurs about the risks they had taken and the risks well-known businesses had taken to get started. It was also suggested that a risk analysis of setting up a business would make students more aware of the practical risks and decisions that would have to be made in the initial set-up of a business post-graduation. Many of these suggestions have previously been discussed in the literature (e.g. Sherman et al., 2008 ). 6. Student feedback Based on student module evaluation, the module received positive module feedback, with 92.9% of students either strongly agreeing or agreeing that ‘they would recommend the module to a friend ’. All of the students either strongly agreed or agreed that they ‘felt fully engaged with this module ’. Positive comments about the experiential learning opportunity that this module provided included: “I thought having £250 of cash was an excellent idea as we were actually dealing with real money and not just pound ﬁgures on paper. It did make the ideas more real, and deciding what to buy with real money rather than paper or imitation money helped with making business decisions and the ﬁgures .” Through the student feedback comments, it was clear that many of the students enjoyed the practical ‘hands-on ’nature of the module and enjoyed the freedom and creativity that it offered. However, it was also evident that whilst some of the students enjoyed and appreciated the independence the module offered, other students would have preferred
that forming groups of three to four students allowed for better delegation of work and better results. In practice, resources, time, and practicalities may determine the group sizes used. 7. Conclusion Experiential approaches to business and entrepreneurship education have become increasingly popular in recent years and now are often seen alongside more traditional approaches. Approaches are increasingly action-orientated, emphasizing a learning by doing approach ( Rasmussen &Sørheim, 2006 ) that can encourage experiential learning by allowing students to actively participate in the entrepreneurial process ( Jones&English, 2004 ). Research suggests that active participation in knowledge creation through group activity or simulation can result in better learning ( Frontczak &Kelly, 2000 ) and furthermore, the challenge of active involvement together with enjoyment of the activity can signi ﬁ cantly increase the motivation and learning of students ( Elam&Spotts, 2004; Karns, 2005 ). Entrepreneurship education can thus bene ﬁt from experiential learning styles, creative problem solving, and learning by doing in order to engage students ( Jones&Iredale, 2010 ). However, it has been argued that further investigation into the effectiveness and student reactions to experiential approaches is required ( Piercy, 2013 ). The approach adopted in this project involved a combination of traditional lectures and active participation in group settings to aid learning and develop basic entrepreneurial skills. The aim of this research was to investigate how experiential learning in this applied setting could help in the development of four key entrepreneurial behaviours identi ﬁed from the literature. The research also sought to identify successful practice and explore how such approaches could be adjusted to improve student learning. Finally, this research sought to measure the level of both student engagement and satisfaction. Based on the student re ﬂections and student
the level of both student engagement and satisfaction. Based on the student re ﬂections and student feedback, the experiential learning approach adopted in this research provided an opportunity to develop each of the four entrepreneurial skills. However, the development of self-ef ﬁcacy wasR. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 44
particularly noticeable. The module's requirement to pitch ideas, present ﬁndings and re ﬂections, and liaise with members of the wider community seemed to encourage the development of self-ef ﬁcacy. Overall, as the students developed and enacted their venture ideas, they also developed self-ef ﬁcacy. It was also interesting to note that the perceptions of attitude to risk and innovation had also positively changed in some cases, as in an understanding of the concept of calculated risks and the use of social media as a communication platform. Interestingly, this approach gave students the opportunity to be creative and innovative, for example, through the advertising and promotion of their events. In contrast, the development of a proactive disposition was met with mixed results, with some students believing they were already proactive, and the module had done little to develop it further, whilst for others the module had highlighted that they needed to be more proactive to be successful. Student feedback indicated a high level of engagement and a high level of student satisfaction. Student suggestions on how to reﬁne the experiential tasks and thus further support the student learning have been considered and discussed in the text. This project has raised several issues that include the consideration of factors such as group size, group formation and the setting of penalties and incentives to make sure all group members are accountable and actively participate. It is worth noting that since some students or cohorts may ﬁnd the lack of formal structure in this type of approach unsettling, the introduction of some periodic formal deadlines and periodic feedback may be advantageous. 7.1. Limitations and future research In common with other research, this study has limitations. It was based on one group of HND students undertaking one module consisting of two active experiential projects. The experiences of different cohorts undertaking different projects may vary.
projects. The experiences of different cohorts undertaking different projects may vary. Although some of the data was collected from critical re ﬂective essays, they were submitted and marked anonymously, which should reduce social desirability bias. Post-course feedback was also collected anonymously. Future research can investigate different academic levels of cohorts and more complex active experiential projects. New innovative projects can be developed to provide new entrepreneurial insights and challenges to different levels of cohorts. Acknowledgements This research was kindly supported by an Academy of Marketing, Teaching and Research Development Grant (2013/14). References Ahamer, G. (2004). Negotiate your future: web-based role play. Campus-Wide Information Systems, 21 (1), 35 e58. Aldrich, H. E., & Martinez, M. A. (2007). Many are called, but few are chosen: an evolutionary perspective for the study of entrepreneurship. In P./C19A. Cuervo, P. D. Ribeiro, & P. S. Roig (Eds.), Entrepreneurship (pp. 293 e311). Springer Berlin Heidelberg . Arvanites, D. A., Glasgow, J. M., Klingler, J. W., & Stumpf, S. A. (2006). Innovation in entrepreneurship education. Journal of Entrepreneurship Education, 9 , 29e44. Athayde, R. (2009). Measuring enterprise potential in young people. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 33 (2), 481 e500. Balan, P., & Metcalfe, M. (2012). Identifying teaching methods that engage entrepreneurship students. Education þTraining, 54 (5), 368 e384. Begley, T., & Boyd, D. (1987). A comparison of entrepreneurs and managers of small business ﬁrms. Journal of Management, 13 (1), 99 e108. Bevan, D., & Kipka, C. (2012). Experiential learning and management education. Journal of Management Development, 31 (3), 193 e197. Biggs, J. (1996). Enhancing teaching through constructive alignment. Higher Education, 32 (3), 347 e364. Bloom, B. S., Engelhart, M. D., Furst, E. J, Hill, W. H, & Krathwohl, D. R. (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives: The classi
Furst, E. J, Hill, W. H, & Krathwohl, D. R. (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives: The classi ﬁcation of educational goals .N e w York: David McKay Company . Bolton, D. L., & Lane, M. D. (2012). Individual entrepreneurial orientation: development of a measurement instrument. Education þTraining, 54 (2/3), 219e233. Bonwell, C. C., & Eison, J. A. (1991). Active learning: Creating excitement in the classroom . Washington, D.C.: Jossey-Bass . Caldwell, J. E. (2007). Clickers in the large classroom: current research and best-practice tips. CBE-Life Sciences Education, 6 (1), 9e20. Carland, J., Carland, J., Carland, J., & Pearce, J. W. (1995). Risk taking propensity among entrepreneurs, small business owners, and managers. Journal of Business and Entrepreneurship, 7 (1), 15 e23. Chen, C., Green, R., & Crick, A. (1998). Does entrepreneurial self-ef ﬁcacy distinguish entrepreneurs from managers. Journal of Business Venturing, 13 (4), 295e316. Collins, L. A., Smith, A. J., & Hannon, P. D. (2006). Applying a synergistic learning approach in entrepreneurship education. Management Learning, 37 (3), 335e354. Covin, J. G., & Slevin, D. P. (1989). Strategic management of small ﬁrms in hostile and benign environments. Strategic Management Journal, 10 (1), 75 e87. Crant, J. M. (2000). Proactive behavior in organizations. Journal of Management, 26 (3), 435 e462. Crooks, T. J. (1988). The impact of classroom evaluation practices on students. Review of Educational Research, 58 (4), 438 e481. Daly, S. P. (2001). Student-operated internet businesses: true experiential learning in entrepreneurship and retail management. Journal of Marketing Ed- ucation, 23 (3), 204 e215. Davies, W. M. (2009). Groupwork as a form of assessment: common problems and recommended solutions. Higher Education, 58 (4), 563 e584. Davis, D., Morris, M., & Allen, J. (1991). Perceived environmental turbulence and its effect on selected entrepreneurship, marketing, and organiza tional characteristics in
and its effect on selected entrepreneurship, marketing, and organiza tional characteristics in industrial ﬁrms. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 19 (1), 43 e51. Denslow, D. L., & Giunipero, L. C. (2003). Improving purchasing success through entrepreneurial behaviour . Nashville, TN: International Supply Management. May 18th e21th . Dewey, J. (1963). Experience and education . New York, NY: Collier Books . Drucker, P. F. (1985). Innovation and entrepreneurship . New York: Harper &Row. Elam, E. L. R., & Spotts, H. E. (2004). Achieving marketing curriculum integration: a live case study approach. Journal of Marketing Education, 26 (1), 50 e65. Fayolle, A., Gailly, B., & Lassas-Clerc, N. (2006). Assessing the impact of entrepreneurship education programmes: a new methodology. Journal of European Industrial Training, 30 ,7 0 1e720. Feinstein, A. H., Mann, S., & Corsun, D. L. (2002). Charting the experiential territory: clarifying de ﬁnitions and uses of computer simulation, games, and role play. Journal of Management Development, 21 (10), 732 e744.R. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 45
Fiet, J. O. (2001). The pedagogical side of entrepreneurship theory. Journal of Business Venturing, 16 (2), 101 e117. Florin, J., Karri, R., & Rossiter, N. (2007). Fostering entrepreneurial drive in business education: an attitudinal approach. Journal of Management Education, 31(1), 17 e42. Freeman, M. (2012). To adopt or not to adopt innovation: a case study of team-based learning. The International Journal of Management Education, 10 (3), 155e168. Frontczak, N. T., & Kelly, C. A. (2000). Special issue on experiential learning in marketing education. Journal of Marketing Education, 22 (1), 3e4. Gasse, Y. (1982). Elaborations on the psychology of the entrepreneur. In D. Sexton, & J. Kasarda (Eds.), The state of the art of entrepreneurship (pp. 57 e71). Boston: PWS-Kent . Gelderen, M. van, Brand, M., Praag, M. van, Bodewes, W., Poutsma, E., & Van Gils, A. (2008). Explaining entrepreneurial intentions by means of the theo ry of planned behaviour. Career Development International, 13 (6), 538 e559. Gibb, A. (2002). In pursuit of a new ‘enterprise ’and ‘entrepreneurship ’paradigm for learning: creative destruction, new values, new ways of doing things and new combinations of knowledge. International Journal of Management Reviews, 4 (3), 233 e269. Gokhale, A. (1995). Collaborative learning enhances critical thinking. Journal of Technology Education, 7 (1), 22 e30. Grimley, M., Green, R., Nilsen, T., Thompson, D., & Tomes, R. (2011). Using computer games for instruction: the student experience. Active Learning in Higher Education, 12 (1), 45 e56. Gundry, L. K., Ofstein, L. F., & Kickul, J. R. (2014). Seeing around corners: how creativity skills in entrepreneurship education in ﬂuence innovation in business. The International Journal of Management Education, 12 (3), 529 e538. Hansen, R. S. (2006). Bene ﬁts and problems with student teams: suggestions for improving team projects. Journal of Education for Business, 82 (1), 11 e19. Harris, M., Gibson, S., & Taylor, S. (2007).
Journal of Education for Business, 82 (1), 11 e19. Harris, M., Gibson, S., & Taylor, S. (2007). Examining the impact of small business Institute participation on entrepreneurial attitudes. Journal of Small Business Strategy, 18 (2), 57 e75. Hynes, B., & Richardson, I. (2007). Entrepreneurship education: a mechanism for engaging and exchanging with the small business sector. Education þTraining, 49 (8/9), 732 e744. Jack, S. L., & Anderson, A. R. (1999). Entrepreneurship education within the enterprise culture: producing re ﬂective practitioners. International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour &Research, 5 (3), 110 e125. Johnson, R. T., & Johnson, D. W. (1986). Action research: cooperative learning in the science classroom. Science and Children, 24 (2), 31 e32. Jones, C., & English, J. (2004). A contemporary approach to entrepreneurship education. Education þTraining, 46 (8/9), 416 e423. Jones, B., & Iredale, N. (2010). Enterprise education as pedagogy. Education þTraining, 52 (1), 7e19. Karlsson, T., & Moberg, K. (2013). Improving perceived entrepreneurial abilities through education: exploratory testing of an entrepreneurial se lf efﬁcacy scale in a pre epost setting. The International Journal of Management Education, 11 (1), 1e11. Karns, G. L. (2005). An update of marketing student perceptions of learning activities: structure, preferences, and effectiveness. Journal of Marketing Ed- ucation, 27 (2), 163 e171. Kerr, N. L. (1983). Motivation losses in small groups: a social dilemma analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45 (4), 819 e828. Knight, J. K., & Wood, W. B. (2005). Teaching more by lecturing less. Cell Biology Education, 4 (4), 298 e310. Kolb, A., & Kolb, D. (2009). Experiential learning theory: a dynamic holistic approach to management learning, education and development. In S. J. Armstrong, & C. Fukami (Eds.), Handbook of management learning, education and development (pp. 42 e68). London: Sage Publications . Kolb, D. (1984).
learning, education and development (pp. 42 e68). London: Sage Publications . Kolb, D. (1984). Experiential learning . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall . Krueger, N. F., Jr. (2000). The cognitive infrastructure of opportunity emergence. Entrepreneurship Theory &Practice, 24 (3), 9e27. Kumar, M. (2007). Explaining entrepreneurial success: a conceptual model. Academy of Entrepreneurship Journal, 15 (1), 57 e77. Kuratko, D. F. (2005). The emergence of entrepreneurship education: development, trends, and challenges. Entrepreneurship Theory &Practice, 29 (5), 577e597. Latane, B. (1973). A theory of social impact . St, Louis, Mo.: Psychonomic Society . Lean, J., Moizer, J., Towler, M, & Abbey, C. (2006). Simulations and games use and barriers in higher education. Active Learning in Higher Education, 7 (3), 227e242. Louw, L., Eeden, S. M. van, Bosch, J. K., & Venter, D. J. L. (2003). Entrepreneurial traits of undergraduate students at selected South African tertiar y in- stitutions. International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour &Research, 9 (1), 5e26. Lumpkin, G. T., & Dess, G. G. (1996). Clarifying the entrepreneurial orientation construct and linking it to performance. Academy of Management Review, 21(1), 135 e172. Lumpkin, G. T., & Dess, G. G. (2001). Linking two dimensions of entrepreneurial orientation to ﬁrm performance: the moderating role of the environment and industry life cycle. Journal of Business Venturing, 16 (5), 429 e451. Mahajan, A. (2012). An experiential approach to developing a pay structure: insights from teaching compensation management. The International Journal of Management Education, 10 (1), 2e11. Makienko, I., & Bernard, E. K. (2012). Teaching applied value of marketing research: a questionnaire design project. The International Journal of Management Education, 10 (2), 139 e145. Man, T. W. Y. (2006). Exploring the behavioural patterns of entrepreneurial learning: a competency approach. Education þTraining, 48 (5), 309 e321. Masters, R.,
learning: a competency approach. Education þTraining, 48 (5), 309 e321. Masters, R., & Meier, R. (1988). Sex differences and risk-taking propensity of entrepreneurs. Journal of Small Business Management, 26 (1), 31 e35. Mezirow, J. (1990). Fostering critical re ﬂection in adulthood . San Francisco: CA: Jossey-Bass . Miller, D. (1983). The correlates of entrepreneurship in three types of ﬁrms. Management Science, 29 (7), 770 e791. Naman, J. L., & Slevin, D. P. (1993). Entrepreneurship and the concept of ﬁt: a model and empirical tests. Strategic Management Journal, 14 (2), 137 e153. Oakley, B., Brent, R., Felder, R. M, & Elhajj, I. (2004). Turning student groups into effective teams. Journal of Student Centered Learning, 2 (1), 9e34. Oosterbeek, H., van Praag, M., & Ijsselstein, A. (2010). The impact of entrepreneurship education on entrepreneurship skills and motivation. European Economic Review, 54 (3), 442 e454. Ormrod, J. E. (2008). Human learning . Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson . Patel, N. V. (2003). A holistic approach to learning and teaching interaction: factors in the development of critical learners. The International Journal of Educational Management, 17 (6), 272 e284. Piaget, J. (1950). The psychology of intelligence . London: Routledge . Piercy, N. (2013). Evaluating experiential learning in the business context: contributions to group-based and cross-functional working. Innovations in Education and Teaching International, 50 (2), 202 e213. Piercy, N., & Caldwell, N. (2011). Experiential learning in the international classroom: supporting learning effectiveness and integration. The International Journal of Management Education, 9 (2), 25 e35. de Pillis, E., & Reardon, K. K. (2007). The in ﬂuence of personality traits and persuasive messages on entrepreneurial intention: a cross-cultural comparison. Career Development International, 12 (4), 382 e396. Platzer, H., Snelling, J., & Blake, D. (1997). Promoting re ﬂective practitioners in nursing: a
Platzer, H., Snelling, J., & Blake, D. (1997). Promoting re ﬂective practitioners in nursing: a review of theoretical models and research into the use of diaries and journals to facilitate re ﬂection. Teaching in Higher Education, 2 (2), 103 e121. Prince, M. (2004). Does active learning work? A review of the research. Journal of Engineering Education, 93 (3), 223 e231. Pruett, M., Shinnar, R., Toney, B, Llopis, F., & Fox, J. (2009). Explaining entrepreneurial intentions of university students: a cross-cultural stu dy.International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour &Research, 15 (6), 571 e594. Rasmussen, E. A., & Sørheim, R. (2006). Action-based entrepreneurship education. Technovation, 26 (2), 185 e194. Rauch, A., Wiklund, J., Lumpkin, G. T, & Frese, M. (2009). Entrepreneurial orientation and business performance: an assessment of past research and suggestions for the future. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 33 (3), 761 e787.R. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 46 --- Rhem, J. (1998). Problem-based learning: an introduction. The National Teaching &Learning Forum, 8 (1), 1e4. Robinson, P. B., Stimpson, D. V., Huefner, J. C, & Hunt, H. K. (1991). An attitude approach to the prediction of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 15 (4), 13 e30. Ross, S. (2011). Focused active learning to improve organizational performance. International Journal of Management Education, 9 (4), 39 e49. Ruben, B. D. (1999). Simulations, games, and experience-based learning: the quest for a new paradigm for teaching and learning. Simulation &Gaming, 30(4), 498 e505. Schumpeter, J. A. (1942). Capitalism socialism and democracy . London: Allen &Unwin . Sesen, H. (2013). Personality or environment? A comprehensive study on the entrepreneurial intentions of university students. Education þTraining, 55 (7), 624e640. Shane, S., Locke, E. A., & Collins, C. J. (2003). Entrepreneurial motivation. Human Resource Management Review, 13 (2), 257 e279. Sherman, P. S., Sebora, T., & Digman, L. A. (2008). Experiential entrepreneurship in the classroom: effects of teaching methods on entrepreneurial c areer choice intentions. Journal of Entrepreneurship Education, 11 ,2 9e42. Simon, B., & Hamilton, D. L. (1994). Self-stereotyping and social context: the effects of relative in-group size and in-group status. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66 (4), 699 e711. Snyder, K. D. (2003). Ropes, poles, and space active learning in business education. Active Learning in Higher Education, 4 (2), 159 e167. Solomon, G. (2008). Entrepreneurship education in the United States. In J. Potter (Ed.), Entrepreneurship and higher education (pp. 95 e118). Paris: OECD and LEED . Stewart, W. H., & Roth, P. L. (2004). Data quality affects meta-analytic conclusions: a response to Miner and Raju (2004) concerning entrepreneurial risk propensity. The Journal of Applied Psychology, 89 (1), 14 e21. Stewart, W. H., Watson, W. E., Carland, J. C., & Carland, J. W. (1999). A
89 (1), 14 e21. Stewart, W. H., Watson, W. E., Carland, J. C., & Carland, J. W. (1999). A proclivity for entrepreneurship: a comparison of entrepreneurs, small busine ss owners, and corporate managers. Journal of Business Venturing, 14 (2), 189 e214. Taatila, V., & Down, S. (2012). Measuring entrepreneurial orientation of university students. Education þTraining, 54 (8/9), 744 e760. Tang, J. T., Tang, Z., Marino, L. D, Zhang, Y., & Li, Q. (2008). Exploring an inverted U-shape relationship between entrepreneurial orientation and pe rformance in Chinese ventures. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 32 (1), 219 e239. Timmons, J., Gillin, L. M., Burshtein, S. L, & Spinelli, S. (2011). New venture creation: Entrepreneurship for the 21st century: A Paci ﬁc Rim perspective . Sydney: McGraw-Hill . Tsay, M., & Brady, M. (2012). A case study of cooperative learning and communication pedagogy: does working in teams make a difference? Journal of the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 10 (2), 78 e89. Van der Sijde, P., Ridder, A., Blaauw, G, & Diensberg, C. (2008). Teaching entrepreneurship: Cases for education and training . Heidelberg: Physica-Verlag . Von Graevenitz, G., Harhoff, D., & Weber, R. (2010). The effects of entrepreneurship education. Journal of Economic Behavior &Organization, Special Issue: Experimental Methods in Entrepreneurship Research, 76 (1), 90 e112. Wiklund, J. (1999). The sustainability of the entrepreneurial orientation performance relationship. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 24 ,3 7e48. Wilson, K. (2008). Entrepreneurship education in Europe. In J. Potter (Ed.), Entrepreneurship and higher education (pp. 119 e138). Paris: OECD and LEED . Zahra, S. A., & Welter, F. (2008). Entrepreneurship education for Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe. In J. Potter (Ed.), Entrepreneurship and higher education (pp. 165 e192). Paris: OECD and LEED . Zhao, H., Seibert, S. E., & Hills, G. E. (2005). The mediating role of self-ef ﬁcacy in the
LEED . Zhao, H., Seibert, S. E., & Hills, G. E. (2005). The mediating role of self-ef ﬁcacy in the development of entrepreneurial intentions. Journal of Applied Psy- chology, 90 (6), 1265 e1272 . Dr Robin Bell joined the Worcester Business School in 2011 and works as a Senior Lecturer within the Marketing subject group, specializing in entrepre- neurship and enterprise development. He is also the School's Director of International Partnerships.R. Bell / The International Journal of Management Education 13 (2015) 37 e47 47
El artículo "Developing the next generation of entrepreneurs: Giving students the opportunity to gain experience and thrive" de Robin Bell, publicado en la Worcester Business School de la Universidad de Worcester, Reino Unido, examina la creciente relevancia de la educación en emprendimiento en las instituciones de educación superior (HEIs). En las últimas dos décadas, ha habido un aumento significativo en la oferta de cursos de emprendimiento, que se imparten principalmente en escuelas de negocios y se integran con disciplinas tradicionales como gestión, marketing y finanzas.

### Objetivo del Estudio
El enfoque principal del estudio es evaluar el impacto de un método de aprendizaje experiencial en el desarrollo de rasgos emprendedores entre los estudiantes, así como medir su nivel de compromiso y satisfacción. Este enfoque se implementó en un módulo de emprendimiento del Higher National Diploma (HND) en una HEI británica, combinando sesiones teóricas con actividades prácticas que requerían a los estudiantes aplicar las habilidades adquiridas en tareas de creciente complejidad.

### Resultados del Estudio
Los resultados mostraron un alto nivel de satisfacción y compromiso entre los estudiantes, quienes consideraron que el enfoque experiencial del módulo había contribuido significativamente a su desarrollo emprendedor. El artículo también discute prácticas exitosas y modificaciones realizadas durante el curso, sugiriendo que el aprendizaje experiencial es una herramienta efectiva para fomentar el espíritu emprendedor.

### Educación en Emprendimiento
El texto define la educación en emprendimiento como el desarrollo de actitudes, comportamientos y capacidades aplicables a lo largo de la carrera de un emprendedor. Se menciona que el emprendimiento es un fenómeno complejo que implica la toma de decisiones en contextos globales y dinámicos, donde la incertidumbre es alta. La literatura presenta un debate sobre los métodos de enseñanza más adecuados para desarrollar el conocimiento emprendedor, con resultados mixtos en investigaciones previas.

### Aprendizaje Experiencial
El artículo destaca el ciclo de aprendizaje experiencial de Kolb, que enfatiza la importancia de la experiencia en el aprendizaje. Este enfoque promueve un aprendizaje activo y orientado a la acción, utilizando métodos como la resolución de problemas y el aprendizaje basado en proyectos. A pesar de la popularidad de estos enfoques, se señala que se necesita más investigación sobre las reacciones de los estudiantes hacia estas metodologías.

### Metodología del Estudio
La investigación cualitativa se basa en estudios previos y explora cómo el aprendizaje experiencial apoya el desarrollo de comportamientos clave del emprendimiento. Los estudiantes participaron en la planificación y ejecución de eventos, reflexionando sobre sus experiencias a través de ensayos y entrevistas. Se enfatiza la importancia del aprendizaje activo y la colaboración en el desarrollo de habilidades críticas.

### Resultados de Aprendizaje
El módulo se diseñó para fomentar un aprendizaje activo y reflexivo, permitiendo a los estudiantes experimentar la organización de eventos y reflexionar sobre su desempeño. Se evaluaron los planes de negocio y se realizaron ensayos reflexivos, lo que contribuyó al desarrollo de competencias clave.

### Comportamientos Emprendedores
El estudio identificó tres comportamientos emprendedores clave: innovación, proactividad y disposición a asumir riesgos. Se argumenta que estos rasgos son fundamentales para el éxito empresarial y que pueden ser fomentados a través de la educación emprendedora.

### Autoeficacia
La autoeficacia, o la creencia en la propia capacidad para realizar tareas, emergió como un factor clave en el desarrollo de la confianza emprendedora. Los estudiantes reportaron un aumento en su autoeficacia a lo largo del módulo, lo que se tradujo en una mayor disposición a asumir riesgos y ser proactivos.

### Conclusiones
El artículo concluye que el aprendizaje experiencial y el trabajo en grupo son estrategias efectivas para enriquecer la educación emprendedora y aumentar la satisfacción de los estudiantes. Se enfatiza la necesidad de un enfoque educativo adaptado que reconozca la naturaleza dinámica del emprendimiento y fomente un aprendizaje activo y reflexivo.

### Implicaciones para la Educación
Se sugiere que las instituciones de educación superior deben alejarse de los métodos tradicionales de enseñanza y adoptar enfoques que prioricen la experiencia práctica y la colaboración. Esto no solo mejorará la preparación de los estudiantes para el mundo empresarial, sino que también fomentará un entorno de aprendizaje más dinámico y relevante.

### Futuras Investigaciones
El texto destaca la necesidad de continuar investigando la efectividad de los enfoques de aprendizaje experiencial en la educación emprendedora, así como explorar diferentes niveles académicos y contextos para comprender mejor cómo se pueden desarrollar las habilidades emprendedoras en los estudiantes.

En resumen, el artículo de Robin Bell proporciona una visión integral sobre la importancia de la educación en emprendimiento y el papel del aprendizaje experiencial en el desarrollo de competencias clave, destacando la necesidad de enfoques innovadores en la enseñanza para preparar a la próxima generación de emprendedores.
