Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Technovation journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/technovation The influence of the lean startup methodology on entrepreneur-coach relationships in the context of a startup accelerator Yashar Mansoori, Tomas Karlsson, Mats Lundqvist Chalmers University of Technology, Entrepreneurship and Strategy, Vera Sandbergs Allé 8B, 41296 Göteborg, Sweden ARTICLE INFO Keywords: The lean startup methodologyEntrepreneurial coaching Startup accelerator Entrepreneur-coach relationshipVicarious learningABSTRACT Theleanstartupmethodologyhasbeensteadilygainingwidespreadpopularityduringthepastfewyears.Aspart of this trend, startup accelerator programs have begun to adopt the methodology as their main organizing framework.At thesame time,coachesandtheircoaching practiceslieatthecoreofmanyacceleratorprograms. Despitethewidespreadrecognitionoftheimportanceofcoaching,thereisalackofknowledgeofhowtheroleofcoaches in accelerators interacts with the lean startup methodology. Using an ethnographic study design com-bined with interviews, this study investigates entrepreneur-coach relationships in the context of a university- based accelerator. The findings show that the lean startup methodology influences how entrepreneur-coach relationships evolve and how the formation and progression of these relationships facilitate learning amongentrepreneurs. The lean startup methodology creates conflict between the information collected from customers and the (perceived) authority of coaches. However, the entrepreneurial method also enables the coaching to be evolutionaryandassumption-changing.Suggestionsaremadeformitigatingchallengesrelatedtotheprogressofentrepreneurial activities and entrepreneur-coach relationships. 1. Introduction This study examines how adhering to the principles of the lean startupmethodology influencesentrepreneur-coachrelationships inthe context of an accelerator program. In recent years, accelerators have been gaining increasing
inthe context of an accelerator program. In recent years, accelerators have been gaining increasing popularity (Hochberg, 2015). From a public policy perspective, it is widely acknowledged that university-based accelerators are important components of regional entrepreneurial ecosystems (McAdam et al., 2016). Accelerators are often limited- duration programs aimed at helping entrepreneurs to define their ideas and build their first prototypes. Traditionally, organizers of such pro- grams have resorted to business planning approaches as organizing framework in order to structure the training and other services they offer. However, as a response tothe move awayfrombusinessplanning approaches,manyacceleratorsnowadopttheleanstartupmethodology (Blank and Dorf, 2012; Ries, 2011), which focuses on iterative learningfrom potential customers (York and Danes, 2014). Many highly ranked accelerators, such as Y Combinator, Techstars, 500 Startups, and An- gelPad structure their services following the guidelines of the lean startup methodology. Although coaching is not addressed as part of the lean startup methodology, this study shows that the methodology in- fluences, in markedly disticnt ways, how knowledge is communicated withinentrepreneur-coachrelationships.Asaresult,thesupportiveanddevelopmental role of coaches (Ladd et al., 2015; Pauwels et al., 2016) changes from mentor and vehicle of knowledge transfer, in line with business planning, to facilitator of a hypothesis-testing practice, as per the lean startup methodology (Christiansen, 2009). Theemergenceoftheleanstartupmethodology hasintroducednew ways in which accelerators and services as part of them are structured. In addition to providing entrepreneurs with a more structured way of thinking and acting, the lean startup methodology provides an orga- nizing framework in which coaches can arrange their activities in new ways. The principles and instructions of the lean startup methodology are being widely implemented as
The principles and instructions of the lean startup methodology are being widely implemented as part of lectures, seminars, and coaching sessions offered at accelerators. In this vein, coaches employ the structure of the methodology to organize their coaching sessions. These sessions are generally centered on topics such as customer in- teraction,hypothesisvalidation,andtheanalysisofgathereddata,allof which are at the center of the instructions of the lean startup metho-dology. The practices of the methodology are embedded within the coaching sessions and contribute to the regularities or irregularities of coaching practices. Despite the prevalence of accelerators and the importance of the role of coaches, relatively few studies have examined entrepreneur- coach relationships in any depth. Those that mention coaching tend to be limited to introducing the existence of such role, rather than https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2019.03.001 Received 17 March 2017; Received in revised form 22 February 2019; Accepted 7 March 2019E-mail address: yashar.mansoori@chalmers.se (Y. Mansoori).Technovation 84–85 (2019) 37– 47 Available online 14 March 2019 0166-4972/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license  (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/). T
providingdetailedexaminationsofthecoachingpracticesandnatureof entrepreneur-coach relationships (Adomdza, 2014). Against this back- drop, the purpose of this study is to investigate entrepreneur-coach relationships at a university-based accelerator in Sweden that follows the lean startup methodology. The research question guiding this study was ‘how the incorporation of the lean startup methodology into the processes of an accelerator influences the dynamics of relationships between entrepreneurs and their assigned coaches’? Here, an ethno- graphic approach is used to examine the lectures, seminars, and coaching sessions that form the backbone of a 15-week accelerator program. In addition, ten interviews with entrepreneurs and six inter- views with coaches were conducted to complement the extensive non- participatoryobservationaldata.Thisstudycontributestotheliterature on accelerators, entrepreneurial coaching, and the lean startup meth- odology in two ways. First, it develops a more in depth understanding of the role of coaches and coaching sessions in terms of both form and content. Second, it traces the instructions of the lean startup metho- dology throughout and beyond the coaching sessions to investigate the influence of the methodology as an organizing framework. 2. Frame of reference Thecurrentresearchsettinginvolvesthreemainspaceswithvarious levels of overlap: the lean startup methodology, entrepreneurial coaching and accelerators. These components will, therefore, be in- troduced here in this order to then qualify the ethnographic study where interrelations between these components will be investigated. 2.1. The lean startup methodology The lean startup methodology by Ries (2011) was inspired by the principles of the lean manufacturing (avoiding waste and optimizing resource spending) and the work of Steve Blank (Blank, 2006). The ideas in the methodology are reminiscent of contributions such as “disciplined entrepreneurship” (Sull, 2004),
methodology are reminiscent of contributions such as “disciplined entrepreneurship” (Sull, 2004), “discovery-driven plan- ning” (McGrath and MacMillan, 2000) and “probe and learn” (Lynn et al., 1996). The methodology benefits from a set of tools taken from other theories and methods, such as the customer development fra- mework (Blank and Dorf, 2012), rapid prototyping of design thinking (Brown, 2008), and agile software development principles (Dybå and Dingsøyr, 2008). Core to the lean startup methodology is validated learning throughpurposeful experimentation,inwhich the effectuation principlesofflexibilityandaffordableloss(ReadandSarasvathy,2005) areapplied(FredriksenandBrem,2017).Theleanstartupmethodology has a unique language, structure and strict advice. Therefore, it can be viewed as a metaphorical boundary object, enabling the wielders of the method to display their expertise (Koskinen, 2005). Validated learning highlights progress through a process of testing a set of carefully for- mulated assumptions and analyzing solid empirical data obtained from real customers (Maurya, 2012; Ries, 2011). The lean startup methodology as a cyclical process is grounded in three main sets of activities. First, entrepreneurs dissect their business ideas into testable assumption and map them onto the business model canvas (Osterwalder et al., 2005) as testable assumptions. This gra- phical respresentation contains all the key aspects that entrepreneurs should be relatively certain about. Second, entrepreneurs engage in a process designed to test the assumptions in realtion to their business ideas (Ries, 2011). The sequence of these tests is determined by the perceivedcriticalityoftheresultsofthetestsforthecontinuationofthe process. One way to test the assumptions is to prepare a “minimum viable product” (MVP). An MVP is a version of the product containing the smallest set of features, built using the minimum amount of time and resources and provides entrepreneurs with the
features, built using the minimum amount of time and resources and provides entrepreneurs with the information re- quired to validate or invalidate their assumptions (Ries, 2011). After a rigorous evaluation of the results, the invalidated assumptions are re- placed by new assumptions and are then re-tested. This processcontinues until a reasonable number of tests validates the critical as-sumptions. Finally, entrepreneurs decide on the remaining assumptions based on their interactions with potential customers. A key concept in theleanstartupmethodologyisthe“product-marketfit.”Thefitimplies that the product idea has a market and, therefore, there are customers willing to pay for the value offered by the product (Blank and Dorf, 2012). The ultimate goal of the process is to guide entrepreneurs in finding this fit. 2.2. Entrepreneurial coaching Coachinghas beendefined in severalways: asallactivities aimedat bringing out the potential of individuals (Hargrove, 2000); all delib- erate intervention activities used to help individuals to develop and achieve their specified goals (Aas and Vavik, 2015); a structured two- way process to developing skills and competencies through “assess- ment, guided practical experience, and regular feedback” (Parsloe, 1999:1); and a set of practices to help individuals to learn (Whitmore, 1992). Coaching is suggested to be instrumental as a support measure (Audet and Couteret, 2012), as a structured framework to steer com- munications and conversations (Spence and Grant, 2007), as a tool to organize peer-learning (Kutzhanova et al., 2009), as a way to create a sense of peer pressure (Van Weele et al., 2015), as a function that createsasenseofbelongingtoalargergroup(Kutzhanovaetal.,2009), and, most importantly, as an aid to encourage action (Cooper et al., 2012; Flaherty, 2005). Inthisstudy,entrepreneurialcoachingisdefinedasthesupportthat entrepreneurs receive in the early stages of their entrepreneurial ac-tivities to help them to develop
receive in the early stages of their entrepreneurial ac-tivities to help them to develop and acquire necessary skills (Audet and Couteret,2012).Thekeytocoaching,ingeneral,andtoentrepreneurial coaching in particular is the notion of learning (Bachkirova et al., 2014).Often,ratherthanresolvingspecificproblems,coachesprovidea contextwithinwhichentrepreneurscandeveloptheskillsandexpertise needed to solve the problems that may arise. Coaching includes all the various ways of helping entrepreneurs in startup accelerator programs, where entrepreneurs lack knowledge, skills, and experience. Therefore, coaches can help entrepreneurs to extract entrepreneur-driven solu- tions. Although sometimes valuable, it is not necessarily the startup background and practical experience of coaches that defines en- trepreneur-coach relationships (Britton, 2010). The productiveness of the relationship between coaches and en- trepreneurs is influenced by factors such as the equality of power be- tween the two sides of the coaching relationship, the extent to which a culture of collaborative learning is promoted, the effectiveness of communication, and the tools and techniques used to facilitate the developmental efforts (Cox et al., 2014; Schein, 1987). In order to promote openness and trust within an entrepreneurial coaching re- lationship, it is advised to avoid a hierarchy between the coach (who can be viewed as the facilitator of learning) and the entrepreneur (O’Broin and Palmer, 2009; Schein, 1987). Moreover, communications can be facilitated effectively through practices such as “listening, clar- ifying, encouraging reflection and criticality, and questioning” (Cox et al., 2014:6), which have been shown to be reliable vehicles for col- laborative learning (Cox, 2013). Therefore, the quality of these re- lationships impacts effective learning by facilitating and speeding up learning episodes. Entrepreneurial coaching relationships can be divided into three archetypes: functionalist,
Entrepreneurial coaching relationships can be divided into three archetypes: functionalist, engagement, and evolutionary. In a function- alistcoaching relationship,thedesiredoutcomeofthecoachingepisodes isincrementalchangestoroutinesandactivities,withnomajorrevision of entrepreneurs’ existing norms and values (Brockbank, 2008). Func- tionalist coaching is directive, didactic, and advice-driven in principle (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). The learning outcome in this style is single-loop learning (Argyris and Schön, 1974). A drawback of this approach is that it views the entrepreneur as “detached, disembodied, and passive” (Brockbank and McGill, 2006:30).Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 38
In anengagement coaching relationship, similar to functionalist coaching, the desired outcome is incremental improvement in routines, while preserving existing norms and values. However, in this case, this happens in a non-directive manner. To minimize resistance from en- trepreneurs, the coach adopts a humanistic and relationship-driven approach (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). This relationship places greater value on learning and change (Brockbank, 2008). The learning outcome in this style is also single-loop learning (Argyris and Schön, 1974) but includes the potential for reflection (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). In contrast to functionalist and engagement coaching, in an evolu- tionary coaching relationship, the desired outcome is transformational development induced by fundamental changes to the established as- sumptions held by entrepreneurs. Similar to an engagement coach, an evolutionary coach adopts a humanistic and relationship-driven ap- proach to learning (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). The learning out- come in this style is double-loop learning (Argyris and Schön, 1974), which promotes the personal and professional development of en- trepreneurs, leading them to improve their existing norms and values (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). Here, the coach helps entrepreneurs to take ownership of their learning and development. The main distin- guishingfeatureofevolutionarycoachingistheplatformitprovidesfor 'reflective dialogue' with entrepreneurs (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). In the context of this study, coaches engage in an evolutionary ap- proach,investingmoretimeinassistingthoughtandreflectionasaway to facilitate learning and development rather than directing en- trepreneurs’ actions. 2.3. Startup accelerators The empirical setting of this study is that of startup accelerators. As a rapidly growing phenomenon, startup accelerators are viewed as a mutation of incubators (Wise and Valliere, 2014), providing more ser- vices than those offered by traditional
incubators (Wise and Valliere, 2014), providing more ser- vices than those offered by traditional incubators to early-stage busi- nesses. In comparison with incubators, accelerators are “fixed-term, cohort-based programs” that include educational and inspirational elements inaddition tocoachingand “culminateina public pitchevent or a demo day” in front of a group of potential investors (Cohen and Hochberg, 2014:4). One of the first accelerators, Y Combinator, was established in the United States in 2005, and has since inspired many others. As part of accelerator programs, entrepreneurs are offered a work space, educational and coaching possibilities, and access to the accelerator’s alumni, network of coaches, and organizers, including venture capitalists, experienced entrepreneurs, and corporate execu- tives (Bruneelet al.,2012). Thesupportive environment of accelerators provides peer learning and peer support, allowing for opportunities for networking and referrals. Being affiliated with an accelerator con- tributes to creating an entrepreneur’s brand and actsas a legitimization tool, helping the entrepreneur to establish contacts and raise necessary funds (Wise and Valliere, 2014). In contrast with incubators, an im- portant value-added service is the role played by coaches. However, despite the growing interest in accelerators from policymakers, private and public investors, universities, and even corporations (Mian et al., 2016), little is known about the role of coaches and their coaching in the context of accelerators. This study relies on data gathered from an accelerator housed by Chalmers Ventures, the incubation and seed-funding subsidiary of Chalmers University of Technology in Sweden. Chalmers is recognized as an entrepreneurial university that emphasizes venture creation (Berggren, 2011; Clarysse and Bruneel, 2007; Jacob et al., 2003; Lundqvist, 2014; Lundqvist and Williams-Middleton, 2008; Ollila and Williams-Middleton, 2011; Wright, 2007). The
Lundqvist and Williams-Middleton, 2008; Ollila and Williams-Middleton, 2011; Wright, 2007). The accelerator program runs for 15 weeks and offers access to its network, coaching, and educational facilities for up to 20 entrepreneurial teams in each cohort. Likemostaccelerators,theaimofthisacceleratorprogramistohelp a business idea or an existing venture to become growth andinvestment-ready (Davila et al., 2010). The accelerator program offersoffice spaces, networking and financing events, dedicated business coaching,andvisitsfromserialentrepreneursandculminatesinademo day. The program bears direct resemblance to the Y Combinator pro- gram in terms of its structure. However, the competition to get into the studied accelerator is lower than Y Combinator, and a consequence is that the ventures in the studied accelerator are younger than those in Y Combinator. Entrepreneurs apply to join the accelerator program while in the earlystagesofthedevelopmentoftheirideasandareputingroupswith assigned coaches. The coaches include successful entrepreneurs, ac- celerator program alumni, venture capitalists, lawyers, angel investors, andcorporateexecutives.Theacceleratorprogramalsooffersanumber of educational lectures covering a wide range of topics in line with the lean startup methodology. The program is structured into three phases, each lasting five weeks. After the second phase, there is a selection process, with almost half of the teams being eliminated. The remaining teams continue through the third phase before pitching their ideas, receivingfeedback,andansweringquestionsposedbyinvestorsandthe public on the final demo day. 3. Data and methods 3.1. Research methods Ithasbeenarguedthatthecombinationofethnography,interviews, andotherdata-collectionmethodscanresultinimportantcontributions as this provides mechanism-based explanations and rich descriptive accounts that cross and connect different levels of analysis (Vaughan, 2009). Ethnography can be understood as “research
connect different levels of analysis (Vaughan, 2009). Ethnography can be understood as “research conducted by si- tuating oneself in a social setting to observe and analyze individual interaction in order to understand some complex social process, event,activity, or outcome” (Vaughan, 2009:690). Ethnographers spend time in their research setting and become immersed in the activities that need attention, including the beginning and ending points. Further- more,theyenterthefieldwithnoclearguidelinesastohowtheprocess might evolve. According to Aldrich and Baker (1997), there is a lack of ethnographical research in the field of entrepreneurship, to which Martinez et al. (2011) concur. This study adopts ethnography as a re- search method to investigate the actions and social interactions in the context of a startup accelerator program. Thus, the empirical evidence is based on ethnographic data, including exploratory non-participant observations,interviews,andsecondarydata,assistingingeneratingan empirically grounded understanding of entrepreneur-coach relation- ships. 3.2. Sample The sample initially consisted of 17 entrepreneurial teams and 41 entrepreneurs. All teams were composed of at least two entrepreneurs and were encouraged to participate in all scheduled activities. The sample included a broad range of participants in terms of age, gender, education, and experience. The accelerator program included three phases. At the end of the second phase, the organizers identified 10 teamstoproceedtothethirdphase.Thus,thesamplewaslimitedtothe remaining teams for further interviews and a closer examination of their processes, although the data gathered through observation up to that point included all 17 teams. This was simply the result of a lack of access to the eliminated teams. During some of the interviews, team members other than the lead entrepreneurs participated, but for sim- plicity, they were treated as a single group in the analysis of the col- lected data. For
for sim- plicity, they were treated as a single group in the analysis of the col- lected data. For instance, statements from entrepreneurs who were part of Startup 1 are presented as S1. Tables 1 and 2 provide additional details about the entrepreneurs and coaches, respectively.Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 39
3.3. Data collection The empirical data for this study were collected through ethno- graphicfieldresearchduringspringandsummerof2016.Thisincluded non-participant observations, in-depth semi-structured interviews, weekly qualitative questionnaires, the cohort’s public Slack channel (a cloud-based team collaboration tool), and field notes collected during the coaching sessions, lectures, and inspirational seminars. During the 15 weeks of the accelerator program, the lead author was physically present at the accelerator and followed nearly all of the activities. All lectures, inspirational seminars, and coaching sessions were recorded. During the weekly coaching sessions, the lead author attended one of the sessions and recorded the other two. Interviews with the lead en- trepreneurs of the 10 teams who proceeded to the third phase, as well as with the six coaches involved in the accelerator program were con- ducted. The interviews lasted 80min each, on average, and were re- corded and transcribed verbatim. Three sets of qualitative ques- tionnaires were sent on a weekly basis: one at the beginning of the week, one after the coaching sessions, and one after the lectures and inspirational seminars. The entrepreneurs were asked about the activ- ities they had undertaken, their learning, and their plans for the up- comingweek.Allthepublicinteractionsbetweentheentrepreneursand their coaches as well as other entrepreneurs, which were documented on the program’s Slack channel were closely monitored and coded. Table 3demonstrates the data sources. 3.4. Data analysis The data were analyzed inductively using grounded methodology principles, following natural language coding and categorization (Miles and Huberman, 1984). All empirical data were imported into a quali- tative data analysis application (Atlas.ti) and open-coded at the level of smallest meaning units (Strauss and Corbin, 1998). The codes include a wide range of topics, such as inclusion of the lean startup
and Corbin, 1998). The codes include a wide range of topics, such as inclusion of the lean startup methodology as part of the accelerator program, coaches and their positions of au- thority, the role of coaching sessions in creating legitimacy for the coaches, the impact of the coaching sessions on entrepreneurs’ mental development, and the role of the social setting in developing necessary skills.Tolimitthebroadcategorizationprocess,thedatawerearranged using the codes and categories related to the entrepreneur-coach re- lationships. The rationale behind focusing on these codes and cate- gories, and excluding others, follows the purpose of the study, which revolves around an explicit entrepreneurial method, the pronounced role of coaches, and the social aspects of the coaching sessions. For instance, the category “lack of instructions on the level of tools and tactics”wasexcludedbecauseitpertainstothedesignoftheaccelerator programratherthantoentrepreneur-coachrelationships.Thisstructure providedarichandconcisenarrativeofevents. Table4presentsthemes and categories.4. Findings Inlinewith Table4,thefindingssectionisorganizedintothreesub- sections, corresponding to the three larger themes. Therefore, eachtheme is discussed by providing quotes from the entrepreneurs and coaches for the identified categories. The findings section focuses pri- marily on the impact of incorporating and applying the lean startup methodology on entrepreneur-coach relationships along the three themes of coaching form, coaching content, and coaching context. 4.1. Coaching form The first theme refers broadly to the elements of the accelerator program that impact the structure of coaching sessions. It provides texture to the dynamics of the entrepreneur-coach relationships and offersinsightsintotheroleplayedbytheinstructionsoftheleanstartup methodology. The entrepreneurs and their coaches interacted through individual and group coaching sessions, as well as during educational lectures. A large
through individual and group coaching sessions, as well as during educational lectures. A large number of these interactions were influenced by the ideas and the instructions of the lean startup methodology. The teamof coaches decided to follow a common structure during the coaching sessions. They explicitly asked entrepreneurs to prepare status updates describingtheircontactswithpeopleoutsidetheirteams,pastactivities relatedtovalidatingtheirhypotheses,andplansforupcomingactivities as well as the insights they gathered from those activities (to provide a space for peer learning). This agenda helped to structure the interac- tions between coaches and entrepreneurs in ways that made en- trepreneurs aware of the activities expected of them and, therefore, facilitated their progress in line with the expectations of the coaches. According to the coaches, this agenda was designed to “provide di- rectionandconfidence”[C1,C3,C4],“helptodevelopnewwaysofthinking and necessary skills” [C1, C5], “induce peer pressure and increase en- gagement” [C1, C6], “encourage sharing experiences and helping each other” [C5, C6], and “cultivate a sense of belonging” [C2, C5, C6]. One of the coaches explained the process of setting the agenda as follows: “We satdownanddiscussedafewheadlinesandthenwedugintothose.Icansay that we finally landed on following the lean startup methodology in every- thingwedid”[C1].Moreover,allcoachesclaimedthattheyfollowedthe principles and instructions of the lean startup methodology explicitly when organizing their coaching sessions and their individual relation- shipswiththeteamstheycoached.Considerthefollowingstatement:“I think that the lean startup methodology and all the tools such as business model canvas give the entrepreneurs and us coaches ways to structure in- formation and find gaps in our knowledge to be able to treat some of the uncertainties and make sense of various situations” [C5]. The inclusion of the lean startup methodology also impacted how
sense of various situations” [C5]. The inclusion of the lean startup methodology also impacted how coaches were viewed by the entrepreneurs during the coaching ses-sions. The structure signalled legitimacy of coaches' experience and facilitated trust between them and the entrepreneurs. The explicit ad- herence to the instructions of the lean startup methodology eventually had a positive influence on the entrepreneur-coach relationships andTable 1 Entrepreneurs and their teams. Idea Prototype before the program Prior knowledge of LSMaMajor changes Finished prototype (S1) Online diagnosis of urinary tract infection No None No Yes (S2) Property registration platform No None No Not completed (S3) Market research platform Yes Limited familiarity Yes Yes (S4) Matchmaking tool for the sublet market No Previous courses Yes Not completed (S5) Digital recruitment service No Limited familiarity Yes Not completed (S6) Sleep optimization app No None No Yes (S7) Online ecological shop No Limited familiarity Yes Yes (S8) Gardeners logging app Yes Limited familiarity No Yes (S9) Smart textile for road workers No None Yes Yes (S10) App for diabetes No None Yes Not completed aThe lean startup methodology.Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 40
created a sense that the coaches possessed the relevant expertise: “I listen to my coach because his knowledge is the sum of years of reading, interactions and solid experiences. I would listen to someone who is an ex- pert in the lean startup processes rather than one who just expresses opi- nions” [S7]. This legitimacy was used directly to resolve internal con- flicts in the teams by referencing the instructions received from the coaches that followed those of the lean startup methodology: “If I said somethingandmyteammembersdisagreedandthenIconfrontedthemwith whatourcoachhadsaid,theyagreedwithmypointaloteasierbecausethey valued our coach’s expertise especially regarding the lean startup metho- dology” [S5]. Moreover, several factors led to the coaches being viewed as figures ofauthority.Placingdemandsontheentrepreneursinlinewiththelean startup methodology, requiring that they structure their activities around them, and the filtering process after the second phase were important factors in the conditioning of the entrepreneur-coach re- lationships.Oneoftheentrepreneursofferedthefollowingstatementin response to a hypothetical question: “If I talk to a bunch of people and then they tell me that an aspect of my idea does not make any sense, and then I consult my coach and he advises me to the contrary, I listen to my coach” [S3]. One of the coaches expressed concern about the un- reasonable trust and authority that this created: “Ifthe coachsaysgoleft and the customer says go right, then the entrepreneurs go left. It is because they have unsound expectations of their coach. Unfortunately, the en- trepreneurshaveabittoomuchrespectforourauthority”[C1]. Inaddition to providing a structure and direction for the coaching sessions and entrepreneur-coach relationships, the instructions of the methodology influenced the thinking and actions of the entrepreneurs. 4.2. Coaching content The second theme refers broadly to the implicit and explicit effects of the lean startup
content The second theme refers broadly to the implicit and explicit effects of the lean startup methodology as the organizing framework on the knowledge content throughout the coaching sessions. Participating in coaching sessions and being exposed to the instructions of the lean startup methodologyledtoa numberofsalientchangesintheactivities undertaken by the entrepreneurs. As part of the coaching sessions, entrepreneurs were asked to map their assumptions about their busi- ness ideas to the business model canvas: “Early in the process, we were supposed to map our critical hypotheses about our target customers, docu- ment them on the [business model] canvas and immediately start talking to themtofigureoutwhetherornottheproblemweaimtosolveactuallyexists outside of our heads” [S4]. Moreover, the coaches explicitly required that entrepreneurs contact potential customers and collect feedback on their ideas: “Our coaches made us goout and talk to as many customers as possible, and report the insights gained through those interactions during coachingsessions.Asitbecamecompetitivebetweentheteams,wepushedallour team members to talk to an even larger number of people” [S1]. The newly introduced activities in the coaching sessions led to new routines and processes: “Every single step we now take is based on the knowledgewe have gathered fromvalidatedsources, mainlyfrom customers and users. Now, every decision we make is based on validated assumptions” [S5]. These new routines eventually translated into new ways ofviewing the venture-creation process. That is, the entrepreneurs’mindset related to reasonable and rational ways to proceed was mod- ified: “Having participated in the coaching sessions and through interacting with our coaches, I think it is fair to believe that when one has an idea, one needs to bounce it back and forth with others in general and customers in particular and consider the feedback one gets after thorough evaluation” [S9]. As a result of the lean
and consider the feedback one gets after thorough evaluation” [S9]. As a result of the lean startup methodology, coaching sessions also created an environment in which entrepreneurs gained self-confidence and self-efficacy. This was facilitated by coaching sessions that pro- videdaforuminwhichentrepreneurscoulddiscusstheirachievements, share their experiences, receive recognition and help other en- trepreneurs, and perceive a level of expertise. Despite failing to fully execute his idea and create the firstprototype, one ofthe entrepreneurs expressed more confidence in pursuing new ideas: “I hope we would continue with our idea but if we do not succeed with it, I feel much more comfortable pursuing a new idea or starting a new company in the future becauseinteractingwithourcoachesgaveusthisexperienceandhelpedusto collect necessary knowledge in relation to starting a new business” [S6]. Another entrepreneur claimed that he now has a clear process for starting a new business: “By completing this accelerator program and participating in the coaching sessions, I believe it is more accessible for us to pursue another idea because I have the experience. Our participation in the coaching sessions and learning from our coaches make me believe that we have a much better overview of the entrepreneurial process” [S2]. In addition to higher self-confidence, entrepreneurs generally ex- pressed higher self-efficacy. Having access to new ways of doing things was instrumental in their perceived self-efficacy. They reported that beinginstructedbythecoachesabouttheleanstartupmethodologyhas helped to improve their chances of success, both during and after the acceleratorprogram:“Iamalreadyresearchinganumberofdifferentideas at the moment.I definitely feelnow thatI have ahigher chance ofbecoming successful at starting my business than if I have not learned about the [the lean startup] methodology” [S8]. In addition to providing content and form, the inclusion of the lean startup
methodology” [S8]. In addition to providing content and form, the inclusion of the lean startup methodology, coupled with the social nature of the coaching sessions, proved to be influential in terms of knowledge accumulation, motivation, and confidence. 4.3. Coaching context The third theme refers broadly to the role played by the context of the coaching sessions in combination with the instructions of the lean startup methodology. This theme focuses on the interactions within the coaching sessions, both between the entrepreneurs and the coaches, and among the entrepreneurs. One of the entrepreneurs described his experience of receiving feedback from his coach as moments that pro- vided himwith newperspectivesthat he had previouslyneglected:“Weattended the coaching sessions each week with the perception that we had confirmed or disconfirmed some of the assumptions about our idea. During these sessions, coaches gave us new angles of perception by arguing in line with the [the lean startup] methodology, even though we thought we had confirmed some aspects of our idea. In many cases, this led us to different directions altogether” [S10]. One of the coaches noted that an importantTable 2 Coaches and their experiences. Experience at the acceleratorCoachtrainingKnowledge about the lean startup methodology Coaching experience Startupscoached (C1) Four years No Trips to California, books, online resources Business plan competitions, Chalmersventures, Chalmers InnovationS1,S2,S4,S5 (C2) Two years No Books and online resources Chalmers Ventures S1,S2,S4,S5 (C3) Four years No Trips to California, books, online resources BornGlobal, Chalmers Innovation S3, S7, S8 (C4) 15 years No Books, online resources, lectures by proponents of the lean startup methodology Chalmers Ventures, Chalmers Innovation S3, S7, S8 (C5) 16 years Yes Books, online resources, lectures by proponents of the lean startup methodology Chalmers Ventures, Chalmers Innovation S6, S9, S10 (C6)One-and-a-half
the lean startup methodology Chalmers Ventures, Chalmers Innovation S6, S9, S10 (C6)One-and-a-half years No Books, online resources, course at Palo Alto Chalmers Ventures S6, S9, S10Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 41
aspect of the coaching sessions was to make the entrepreneurs follow the lean startup methodology, report back on the insights they had gained through customer interactions and capitalize on the social nature of the coaching sessions. The intention was to encourage further interactionsandlearningpossibilitiesduringthecoachingsessions.One of the coaches expressed this as follows: “The point is that we wanted them to get out of the building and conduct interviews, to start interacting with their customers and report them back. We explicitly asked them for solid evidence and the implications of the evidence collected through those interactions”[C3].Ingeneral,thecoachesencouragedtheentrepreneurs to “raise the bar” [C2, C5, C6] by increasing the number of interactions in subsequent weeks. The coaches used the lean startup methodology to add richness to the social interactions of the coaching sessions. They encouraged en- trepreneurstoseethemselvesinthecoachinggroupsasmembersof“the collective brain” [C5] and, therefore, find ways to help their fellow en- trepreneurs by being supportive at all times. Many of the interactions among entrepreneurs were influenced by the instructions of the lean startup methodology. As a result, entrepreneurs shared their experi- ences and received feedback from other entrepreneurs: “We spend a lot of time with each other working out a map of where we should be going, what we should be doing, and planning activities while giving each other feedback. We gave advice or got inspiration. For instance, we got interesting feedback on the experiments we had designed to validate some of ourhypotheses” [S9]. One of the coaches described the dynamics of the coaching sessions as follows: “When entrepreneurs talked about a parti- cular topic, they knew that others may have gone through the same process before.So,theywantedtoknowwhatandhowothershavemanagedvarious issuesandwhattheirlearningwas”[C2].Anothercoachcharacterizedthe coaching sessions as learning
issuesandwhattheirlearningwas”[C2].Anothercoachcharacterizedthe coaching sessions as learning and developmental episodes, leading to entrepreneursbondoverknowledgeand,thus,benefitfromeachother’s expertise: “The relationships can get more solidified. When two en- trepreneurs with quite different opinions on something discussed during the coaching sessions, they triggered something in each other. The group nature of the coaching sessions allowed for this to happen. I think the bonding over the knowledge and the ensuing friendships between the entrepreneurs were important outcomes of using the lean startup methodology in the coaching sessions” [C1]. In addition, the nature of these coaching sessions provided a ple- thora of possibilities for peer learning and peer pressure. The coaches consciously created a competitive setting, which contributed to the formation of these possibilities. On several occasions, entrepreneurs discussed learning events that had resulted from second-hand experi- ences during the coaching sessions. By virtue of being present at the coaching sessions, entrepreneurs succeeded in accumulating relevant knowledge in line with the lean startup methodology that proved helpfultotheirprocesses.Considerthefollowingstatementfromoneof the entrepreneurs during an informal chat with the lead author: “ITable 3 Empirical data. Data type Sources of data Details Interviews Six coaches 8h 12 entrepreneurs 11h Observations 12 group coaching sessions 12.6h Seven lectures and six seminars 20h Discussions between coaches during pre-program selection meeting 2h Discussions between coaches during mid-program selection meeting 3h 17 elevator pitches during demo day at the end of phase 2 4h 10 15-min pitches during final demo day 3h Presentations PowerPoint slides 27 slide decks Messages and discussions Slack channel communications 40 pages Qualitative questionnaires Three sets of weekly online questionnaires 471 data points Researcher’s notes Non-participant
Three sets of weekly online questionnaires 471 data points Researcher’s notes Non-participant observations in the program 65 pages Recordings 27 group coaching sessions 20h Table 4The emerging themes and categories. Themes Categories Example codes Coaching form •The lean startup methodology and the entrepreneur-coach dynamics•Coaches and the position of authority•Coaches and their legitimacy•Coaching sessions and revised structure•Coaching sessions and facilitation of trust formation•The coaches’ expectations from the entrepreneurs in line with the methodology•Valuing coaches’ opinions higher than external sources of data•Coaches’ knowledge about the methodology creating credibility•Commitment to the lean startup methodology as a structuring framework•Building trust facilitated by the demands of the methodology to share progress and problems Coaching content •Coaching sessions and changes in activities undertaken•Coaching sessions and changes in mindset•Coaching and elevated self-confidence•Coaching and elevated self-efficacy•A systematic approach to validating ideas facilitating interactions with coaches•Understanding changes and openness to flexibility•Group coaching as a tool contributing to self-confidence•Changes in perception related to the difficulty of starting a new business Coaching context •Social aspectsof the coaching sessions(interactions with the coaches)•Social aspects of the coaching sessions (interactions with the other entrepreneurs)•Coaching sessions and opportunities for peer learning•Competition and progress•Coaching sessions and peer pressure•Coaches encouraging more discussion and participation•Entrepreneurs sharing contacts and offer help•Entrepreneurs sharing plans on how they validated their hypotheses•Competition as a motivating factor for entrepreneurs to contact customers•Coaching session as a mechanism to pressure entrepreneurs into more actionY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 42
remember several occasions during the coaching sessions that one of the entrepreneurs asked a question or shared a specific experience and the question was exactly what I was pondering about or the insights from the experience were very relevant to my own process” [S10]. The coaches viewed the coaching sessions as arenas in which entrepreneurs could give each other feedback and listen to and learn from each other’s ex- periences: “The main goal behind the coaching sessions was to build an effectiveculturewhereentrepreneurssharedexperiencesandgaveeachother leads” [C6]. Moreover, the coaches placed pressure on the entrepreneurs by exposing them to other entrepreneurs’ achievements. They structured the coaching sessions in a way that the entrepreneurs were required to give status updates, including critical insights gained through their interactions with customers. This helped the coaches to create pressure and provide encouragement and, therefore, get entrepreneurs to raise their ambitions: “We certainly wanted to make it more efficient by having peer pressure among the teams. The idea was to expose them to what other teams have really been up to, talking to people, getting a deeper under- standing, and getting more meaningful contacts with potential customers” [C4]. This resulted in a competitive environment in which some en- trepreneurs tried to surpass others by becoming more proactive and persistentinattractingtheattentionoftheircoaches:“Itwasgoodforthe entrepreneurs to listen and see how other teams were progressing in relation to what they were doing. It became somehow a competitive environment. Whenwegavethematask,theydidnotwanttocomebackandbetheworst guys in the room. They knew that at the end of the day, there was a qua- lification for them to be able to continue in the accelerator program. I think thisresultedinthemperformingbetterbybeinginasocialsetting,listeningto other entrepreneurs and contributing to discussions” [C3]. In general, en- trepreneurs were
other entrepreneurs and contributing to discussions” [C3]. In general, en- trepreneurs were positive about the competitive side of the coaching sessions and associated some of their progress to this specific element: “Thecoachesmadeitintoacompetitionbetweenus.Ithinkthatitwaswhen they pushed the hardest that we progressed the most by fighting the mostduring this experience” [S8]. 4.4. A brief summary of the key findings The findings suggest several ways in which the lean startup meth- odology influenced the entrepreneur-coach relationships. The coaches were tasked with providing direction and confidence and help en- trepreneurs to develop their thinking and gather necessary skills. However, the dynamics of the coaching sessions were more similar to a traditional leader–follower structure. The lean startup methodology enabled coaches to create the sense of trust and competence necessary to establish productive entrepreneur-coach relationships. The coaches’ advice in line with the instructions of the lean startup methodology helped to reduce team conflict by resolving intra-team deadlocks. Interestingly, the entrepreneur-coach relationships were shown to beat odds with the basic theoretical principles of the lean startup metho- dology,namely,thathypothesesshouldbetestedagainstempiricaldata collected through interactions with potential customers, rather than having theory or authority be the key principles guiding action. A particular aspect of the coaching sessions was the opportunities it provided for social and peer learning. This affected the entrepreneur- coach relationships, as well as how the coaching sessions were struc- tured and organized. Lastly, entrepreneurs felt they benefited from the competitive environment. 5. Discussion This study explores the relationships between entrepreneurs and their coaches within the context of an accelerator, guided and struc- tured explicitly by the instructions of the lean startup methodology. Employinganethnographicresearch
explicitly by the instructions of the lean startup methodology. Employinganethnographicresearch design,thisstudyoffersimportant insight into the coaching practices and how the inclusion of the lean startup methodology helps to influence and shape coaching practices.The discussion section is divided into four sub-sections: the structure ofthe coaching sessions, the dynamics governing the entrepreneur-coach relationships, the paradox of data in relation to authority, and the vi- carious learning that occurs during these coaching sessions. 5.1. The structure of coaching sessions The experience of entering an accelerator program and facing si- milar challenges has been found to cultivate strong ties and create a common identity among entrepreneurs (Bruneel et al., 2012). Previous studies have shown that participating in lectures and inspirational seminars relevant to problems faced by entrepreneurs contributes to an increased knowledge base among the participants (Davidsson and Honig, 2003). In the current case, coaches organized the coaching sessions following the lean startup methodology to encourage en- trepreneurs to act and to allow for their transparent evaluation. This included encouraging entrepreneurs to share detailed accounts of their activities specific to the lean startup methodology in order to build bonds among them. The setup of the studied accelerator program culminated in the announcement of a winning team that was offered investment and created a competitive environment. Therefore, there was both a com- munal feeling among entrepreneurs where collaborating and co- operating was the norm as well as a sense of competition and rivalry (Bøllingtoft, 2012). The adoption of the lean startup methodology fos- teredbotheffects.Onthe onehand,itledto entrepreneurscarryingout activities to attract the attention of their coaches. On the other hand, entrepreneurs used coaching sessions based on the lean startup meth-
coaches. On the other hand, entrepreneurs used coaching sessions based on the lean startup meth- odologyasopportunitiestocollectivelymakesenseofthemethodology. Entrepreneurs attempted to understand the instructions of the metho- dology through repeated discussion and reflection, both with coaches and other entrepreneurs. This can be interpreted as a process of knowledgeinternalization(Nonaka etal.,1996)aswell astheadoption of certain guiding principles (Argyris and Schön, 1974). 5.2. The dynamics of entrepreneur-coach relationships Effective relationships between coaches and entrepreneurs and among entrepreneurs are conditioned by the process of their initiation: formally, under a pre-established structure as part of an initiative (e.g., an accelerator program), or informally, through personal relationships between coaches and entrepreneurs (Eby and Lockwood, 2005). In the accelerator program, the formation of these relationships was pre- determined by the organizers. That is, entrepreneurs and coaches were paired based on coaches’ interests in the business ideas. The initial dynamics of the relationships were impacted directly by the introduc- tionoftheleanstartupmethodology.Thiswasanaturaloutcomeofthe methodology defining and dictating the structure and content of the coaching sessions. The effectiveness of these entrepreneur-coach relationships is lar- gely dependent on an environment of trust and closeness. Trust has been identified as a precondition for channeling coaches’ expertise to supportentrepreneurs’learninginasystematicway(Rymer,2002).The methodology directs coaches’ conversations in the coaching sessions and aligns their expectations with the perceived expectations of en- trepreneurs. This provides a common starting point for discussions, highlights coaches’ skills in relation to the lean startup methodology and leads to a sense of mutual trust (Audet and Couteret, 2012). By posing questions that allow entrepreneurs to openly discuss their pro- gress,
Couteret, 2012). By posing questions that allow entrepreneurs to openly discuss their pro- gress, be proud of their progress, and ask for help in domains where they lack experience and expertise, coaches can create trust without seeming incompetent. Trust helps to form the pretext to learning from the coaching ses- sions,namely,acknowledgingalackofexperienceandexpertiserelated to specific tasks and the skills necessary to perform the expected ac- tivities. This signals the need for learning and acquiring newY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 43
knowledge, creating closer relationships between entrepreneurs and their coaches (Kutzhanova et al., 2009). It also encourages honest in- teractions with the coaches. Entrepreneurs’ initial and continued com- mitment to fruitful relationships with their coaches and their will- ingness to change their behavior and actions are critical to the quality of interactions (Audet and Couteret, 2012; Peterson and Millier, 2005). Sustained trust between entrepreneurs and their coaches increases the likelihood of adopting the structures put in place by the coaches. Previous studies note that coaches should adopt the role of pro- vidingthenecessarystructureforentrepreneurs(Raginsetal.,2016).In the case of the studied accelerator program, the coaches employed the structure of the lean startup methodology, offering shared mental models and additional points of departure. The methodology facilitates interactions and conversations between entrepreneurs and their coa- ches. By coupling this with inspirational seminars, coaches created le- gitimacy for the lean startup methodology as the structuring frame- work. Inherent in its logic, the methodology encourages flexibility and openness to change, resulting in a space where entrepreneurs are more likely to change their behavior, attitude, knowledge base, and to adopt new tools. The current approach resembles an evolutionary coaching strategy aimed at transforming and developing entrepreneurs by in- ducing fundamental changes to their established assumptions (BrockbankandMcGill,2006).Thiscontrastswithbusinessplan-driven coaching, which tends to be more functional in style. It has been suggested that coaches’ expertise has a direct impact on the outcomes of their coachingactivities (Spence and Grant,2007; Sue- Chan and Latham, 2004). Coaches' advocating for the lean startup methodology contributes to their perceived experience and expertise. Entrepreneurs’ perceptions of coaches’ expertise are important to the coaches’ legitimacy.
Entrepreneurs’ perceptions of coaches’ expertise are important to the coaches’ legitimacy. However, other characteristics of coaches, such as their familiarity with the subject area and previous experience in coaching, too, influence their legitimacy and the entrepreneur-coach relationships. Hence, the lean startup methodology coupled with thecoaches’expertiseinfluenceentrepreneur-coachrelationshipsinspiteof our results showing that expertise is valued more highly than the methodology. 5.3. Paradox of data versus authority An interesting and important finding relates to the role of authority during the coaching sessions and in the entrepreneur-coach relation- ships. Contrary to the ideas of the lean startup methodology, the coa- cheswerenotperceivedasneutralfacilitators,guidingentrepreneursin following the instructions. Owing to the design of the accelerator pro- gram—having three phases and oneround of qualificationat the endof the second phase—the coaches were not seen as facilitators of skill development,butratherasauthorityfigureswhoseopinionswereoften valued more highly than the data. This is in stark contrast to the foundation of the lean startup methodology that the data collected through interactions with potential customers have primacy over prior or outdated knowledge and experience (Blank and Dorf, 2012; Ries, 2011).Coaches’expertiseintermsofbusinessdevelopmentshouldonly matter as a way to create a sense of legitimacy. This leads to a para- doxical situation: coaching may be detrimental to the adoption and execution of the lean startup methodology. To overcome this paradox, coaches would benefit from being aware of their style of advising and how they seek to transform entrepreneurs and should be less concerned about their legitimacy and instructive capabilities. Here, they can instead focus on encouraging team mem- bers to speak to one another and engage in learning (Harms, 2015). At the same time, coaches should generate a base-level legitimacy to be
in learning (Harms, 2015). At the same time, coaches should generate a base-level legitimacy to be able to inspire action and elicit trust from entrepreneurs and to con- vince them to adhere to the lean startup methodology. This highlights the importance of early and clear communication by coaches as facil- itators of skill development in the lean startup methodology and of a processofconsultation(Schein,1987).Thismayrequireacleardivisionof labor between those involved in selecting the teams and those actingas coaches. Note that the structure of the accelerator program provides an environment that elevates the importance of coaches as authority figures, thus undermining the validity and significance of the empirical evidence collected by entrepreneurs. 5.4. Vicarious learning as part of the coaching sessions The structure of the coaching sessions created a space for vicarious learning. Because peer learning is an important goal and outcome of coaching sessions, entrepreneurs are enabled to bypass experience by listeningtoother’sexperiences.Inthisway,entrepreneurscandecrease the economic and psychological cost of trial and error while benefiting from second-hand experiences. Vicarious learning, represented by lis- tening and reflective thinking (Nehls, 1995), is largely conditioned by the values individuals associate with the outcome of the modeled ex- periences(GioiaandManz,1985).Someofthemodeledbehaviorswere communicated to them by coaches and others by entrepreneurs. As a faster method than direct experience, these learning episodes create a larger knowledge base among entrepreneurs and affect their inter- personalrelationshipswithotherentrepreneurs.Theintroductionofthe lean startup methodology and its influence on the structure of the coaching sessions had a direct impact on the progression of vicarious learning episodes. A factor that fosters vicarious learning is the acknowledgement that others can provide insights from their own experiences that are per-
is the acknowledgement that others can provide insights from their own experiences that are per- ceived asapplicabletoindividuals'owncases(Ellisetal.,2004).This is linked directly to the notions of legitimacy and authority and how they are signaled successfully early on or are acquired in a relationship (Cleggetal.,2007).Thesenotionsbecomeespeciallyrelevantwhenthe ideas communicated from a position of authority and legitimacy are treated as truth and, therefore, not subject to scrutiny and interpreta- tion (Harden, 2000). This suggests that building trust and legitimacy rather than authority is important to facilitating vicarious learning in these settings. In other words, there is value in giving prominence to and encouraging interactions between entrepreneurs to cultivate such learning. In line with the vicarious learning taking place as part of the coaching sessions, inspirational seminars can play an important role because they function as legitimizers of the lean startup methodology. In the studied accelerator, most of the speakers explicitly endorsed the lean startup methodology and were viewed by the entrepreneurs as legitimate figures who were well-versed in terms of the methodology’s core ideas. This created a space that helped entrepreneurs to learn vi- cariously from these speakers, whose success they associated with the methodology, encouraging them to act in accordance with the metho- dology’s instructions. 5.5. Implications for theory The lean startup methodology has gained broad acceptance in the startup community in a relatively short period (Fredriksen and Brem, 2017). However, there is a lack of evidence on the effectiveness of the methodology. There is also little knowledge about the role of en- trepreneurial coaching in accelerators driven by the lean startup methodology. The main implications for theory from this study are around the lean startup methodology used in accelerators, namely: 1) its behavior-changing effects, 2) its trust-building
methodology used in accelerators, namely: 1) its behavior-changing effects, 2) its trust-building qualities, 3) its lim- itations, and 4) its potential to open a new conversation into the pragmatic role of entrepreneurial methods in entrepreneurial coaching practices. First, lean startup methodology used by coaches in an accelerator has notable effects both on entrepreneur-coach relationships and on vicarious learning among entrepreneurs. The transformative effects captured in the current study do not stem only from coaching or ac- celerator context alone but also from the introduction of the leanY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 44
startup methodology bycoaches asanorganizing framework.This is an effect beyond entrepreneurs cultivating strong ties and creating common identity, previously identified in accelerator programs (Bruneel et al., 2012). The lean startup methodology helps to structure entrepreneur-coach interactions, as well as, provides an environment with plenty of opportunities for vicarious learning among en- trepreneurs. Second, trust is a precondition for entrepreneurs to learn in a sys- tematicwayaspreviouslyfound(Rymer,2002).Moreover,Howtrustis built matters greatly. Trust instilled through the lean startup metho- dology as an organizing framework differs from the traditional way coaches have gained trust by using authority, previous success, and personal experiences and position. The latter arguably results in a functional business planning focused coaching style, whereas the lean startup methodology in the current study enabled an evolutionary coaching style transforming and developing entrepreneurs by inducing fundamental changes to their established assumptions (Argyris and Schön, 1974). Paying attention to microlevel interactions between accelerator coaches, their practices and entrepreneurs, thus, provides additional richness to our understanding of the relationship between the accel- erator environment and entrepreneurial performance (Soetanto and Jack, 2016; Van Weele et al., 2017). Our study suggests that the in- troduction of the lean start up methodology in accelerators changes the authority of coaches, possibly rendering them less assertive. While this enabled a more evolutionary coaching style, it also indicates that coaching theory in the context of accelerators need to deal with the dilemma between authority, expertise and assertiveness, on the one hand, and method-orientation on the other hand. Third,thereareanumberofcaveatsinrelationtothecontextofuse for the lean startup methodology. All the entrepreneurs examined here were working on ideas where interaction
startup methodology. All the entrepreneurs examined here were working on ideas where interaction with customers was key. This is in line with the lean startup methodology holding the customer as amain authority. However, ventures with lower levels of technological readiness (e.g., bioengineering or material sciences) might benefit from other methods than the likes of the lean startup methodology (Harms etal.,2015).Also,coachesinmorespecializedacceleratorscouldtakea larger role in offering networks for the benefit of their clients, as sug- gested by Baraldi and Ingemansson-Havenvid (2016) within medical sciences, rather than asking entrepreneurs to take on all such networkbuilding activities. Nevertheless, prescriptive entrepreneurial methods (Mansoori, 2018) such as the lean startup methodology, can play an important role in changing the relationship between the entrepreneurs and their coaches from functionalist and engagement to evolutionary. And fourth, entrepreneurial methods can be seen as vehicles for making coaches into agents of behavioral modifications rather than the de facto bearers of context dependent knowledge (Grant, 2006). As- sumption-changing behavior of entrepreneurs by coaches has pre- viously not been anticipated in research nor in the lean startup meth- odology itself. Research on entrepreneurial coaching, accelerators, and the broader entrepreneurship would benefit from more investigation of applied entrepreneurial methods. It should also strive to improve en- trepreneurial methods and devise novel ones that not only can illumi- nate the path for entrepreneurs but also help enrich the entrepreneur- coach relationships and by proxy benefit startup accelerators. Hence, this study opens a new conversation into the pragmatic role of entrepreneurial methods in understanding the dynamics of en- trepreneurial coaching. Entrepreneurial methods can be seen not only as tools to organize entrepreneurial activities but also as boundary objects (Koskinen,
not only as tools to organize entrepreneurial activities but also as boundary objects (Koskinen, 2005) facilitating the transition of coaches from authoritarian know-it-alls to enablers of behavioral changes in en- trepreneurs (Parsloe and Leedham, 2009). That is, entrepreneurial methodscanactasvehiclesofchangeinentrepreneurialbehavior,from traditional planning approaches to more experimental and experiential styles. This brings to the forefront the need for more thorough in- vestigation of the role of entrepreneurial methods on entrepreneurialoutcomes (Mansoori, 2018). A question that remains is whether the leanstartupmethodologycanactinsimilarwaysinthedailypracticeof entrepreneurs as in formalized and cohort-based context of accel- erators. 5.6. Implications for practice This study highlights the importance of the role of coaches and the challenges in the design of accelerator programs based on the lean startup methodology. When structuring activities, accelerators have traditionally focusedon a combinationof theories on businessplanning and on the experience of coaches. Coaches’ experience is an important factor in entrepreneur-coachrelationships becausethey are regarded as experts and their experience is considered as instruction for further action. However, including the lean startup methodology introduces challenges into the design of such programs and the role played by coaches. Therefore, it may be necessary to reconsider the role of coa- ches in these programs. Coaches need to consider a process of con- sultationthatisempoweredbyavoidingthepitfallsofexercisingexpert authority (Schein, 1987). A possible way forward may be to regard coaches more as facil- itators of knowledge accumulation and skill development than au- thority figures with extensive experience. Coaches should then limit their authoritative advice to suggestions and options (Hytti and O’Gorman, 2004) and allow entrepreneurs to drive their processes. Therefore, they should aim to formulate
2004) and allow entrepreneurs to drive their processes. Therefore, they should aim to formulate their advice and opinions as hypotheses subject to validation rather than as facts based on past ex- periences. Moreover, there may be benefits in dividing the functions of coaches and organizers. In the studied accelerator program, the fact that the coaches were also the organizers led to some entrepreneurs valuing their coaches’ experience more highly than the data they col- lected from potential customers. This contradicts the basics of the lean startup methodology and creates confusion for entrepreneurs. Thus, there is a need to rethink the design of accelerator programs to provide a space that negates cognitive biases such as anchoring and confirma- tion biases (Kahneman, 2011). 6. Conclusion This study examines the dynamics of entrepreneur-coach relation- ships in a university-based accelerator in Sweden based on the lean startup methodology. The main result is that entrepreneur-coach re- lationshipsaredirectlyimpactedbythe introductionoftheleanstartup methodology because the methodology defines and dictates the struc- tureandcontentofthecoachingsessionsand,thus,providesacommon starting point for discussions. The methodology instills trust, en- courages honest interactions with coaches, and increases participants’ willingness to change their behavior. Thus, it contributes to an evolu- tionary coaching strategy aimed at transforming and developing en- trepreneurs. This finding contrasts with business plan-driven coaching, which tends to be more functional in style. Contrary to the ideas of the lean startup methodology, the coaches were not perceived as neutral facilitators, guiding entrepreneurs in following the methodology. Rather, they were seen as authority figures whose opinions were often valued more highly than the data. The structure of the coaching ses- sionscreatedaspaceforvicariouslearningepisodes.Asafastermethod than direct experience, these episodes
than direct experience, these episodes contribute to a larger knowledge base amongentrepreneurs andimpact theirinterpersonal relationships. Future research should investigate how the coaching style and or- ganization of accelerators affect the paradox of coaches being too au- thoritative in relation to entrepreneurs, potentially hampering the en- trepreneurs’ hypothesis-generation and testing efforts. In addition, the legitimacyofthemethodologymightbechallengedbythenatureofthe venturesbeingaccelerated.Futureresearchshouldinvestigatehowwell the methodology suits ventures that have lower technology readiness levels and other characteristics that affect the heterogeneity of theY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 45
accelerator program. Furthermore, focusing on the relationship be- tween novices and seniority in coaching when using the methodology could be a promising avenue for future research. Finally, this study focused on entrepreneur-coach relationships while indicating the im- portance of team learning and other forms of peer learning within an accelerator. Future research should consider how such vicarious and experiential learning are affected by the lean startup methodology and other entrepreneurial methods. References Aas,M.,Vavik,M.,2015.Groupcoaching:anewwayofconstructingleadershipidentity? Sch. Leadersh. Manag. 35, 251–265. Adomdza,G.,2014.Choosingbetweenastudent-runandprofessionallymanagedventure accelerator. Entrep. Theory Pract. 40, 943–956. Aldrich, H., Baker, T., 1997. Blinded by the cites? Has there been progress in en- trepreneurship research? In: Sexton, D., Smilor, R. (Eds.), Entrepreneurship 2000. Upstart Publishing Company, Chicago, IL, pp. 377–400. Argyris, C., Schön, D.A., 1974. Theory in Practice: Increasing Professional Effectiveness. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA. Audet, J., Couteret, P., 2012. Coaching the entrepreneur: features and success factors. J. Small Bus. Enterp. Dev. 19, 515–531. Bachkirova, T., Cox, E., Clutterbuck, D., 2014. Introduction. In: Cox, E., Bachkirova, T., Clutterbuck,D.(Eds.),TheCompleteHandbookofCoaching.Sage,London,pp.1–20. Baraldi, E., Ingemansson-Havenvid, M., 2016. Identifying new dimensions of business incubation: a multi-level analysis of Karolinska Institute's incubation system. Technovation 50, 53–68. Berggren, E., 2011. The entrepreneurial university’s influence on commercialization of academic research–the illustrative case of Chalmers University of Technology. Int. J. Entrep. Small Bus. 12, 429–444. Blank, S., 2006. The Four Steps to the Epiphany. Cafepress, San Francisco, CA.Blank, S., Dorf, B., 2012. The Startup Owner’s Manual: The Step-by-Step Guide for Building a Great Company. K&S Ranch, Incorporated, San
Owner’s Manual: The Step-by-Step Guide for Building a Great Company. K&S Ranch, Incorporated, San Francisco, CA. Bøllingtoft, A., 2012. The bottom-up business incubator: leverage to networking and cooperation practices in a self-generated, entrepreneurial-enabled environment. Technovation 32, 304–315. Britton, J., 2010. Effective Group Coaching: Tried and Tested Tools and Resources for Optimum Coaching results. John Wiley & Sons, Ontario, Canada. Brockbank,A., 2008.Isthecoachingfit forpurpose?Atypologyof coachingandlearning approaches. Coach.: Int. J. Theory, Res. Pract. 1, 132–144. Brockbank, A., McGill, I., 2006. Facilitating Reflective Learning Through Mentoring and Coaching. Kogan Page Publishers, London, United Kingdom. Brown, T., 2008. Design thinking. Harvard Business Review 86, 84–92. Bruneel, J., Ratinho, T., Clarysse, B., Groen, A., 2012. The evolution of business in- cubators: comparing demand and supply of business incubation services across dif- ferent incubator generations. Technovation 32, 110–121. Christiansen, J., 2009. Copying Y Combinator, A Framework for Developing Seed AcceleratorPrograms (MBAdissertation).UniversityofCambridge,UnitedKingdom. Clarysse, B., Bruneel, J., 2007. Nurturing and growing innovative start-ups: the role of policy as integrator. R&D Manag. 37, 139–149. Clegg, S., Rhodes, C., Kornberger, M., 2007. Desperately seeking legitimacy: organiza- tional identity and emerging industries. Organ. Stud. 28, 495–513. Cohen, S., Hochberg, Y., 2014. Accelerating startups: the seed accelerator phenomenon. SSRN Electron. J. 1–16. Cooper,C.,Hamel,S.,Connaughton,S.,2012.Motivationsandobstaclestonetworkingin a university business incubator. J. Technol. Transf. 37, 433–453. Cox, E., 2013. Coaching Understood. SAGE Publications Limited, London, United Kingdom. Cox,E.,Bachkirova,T.,Clutterbuck,D.,2014.Theoreticaltraditionsandcoachinggenres: mapping the territory. Adv. Dev. Hum. Resour. 16, 1–22. Davidsson, P., Honig, B., 2003. The role of social
the territory. Adv. Dev. Hum. Resour. 16, 1–22. Davidsson, P., Honig, B., 2003. The role of social and human capital among nascent entrepreneurs. J. Bus. Ventur. 18, 301–331. Davila, A., Foster, G., Jia, N., 2010. Building sustainable high-growth startup companies: management systems as an accelerator. Calif. Manag. Rev. 52, 79–105. Dybå, T., Dingsøyr, T., 2008. Empirical studies of agile software development: a sys- tematic review. Inform. Softw. Technol. 50, 833–859. Eby, L., Lockwood, A., 2005. Proteges' and mentors' reactions to participating in formal mentoring programs: a qualitative investigation. J. Vocat. Behav. 67, 441–458. Ellis,R.,Calvo,R.,Levy,D.,Tan,K.,2004.Learningthroughdiscussions.High.Educ.Res. Dev. 23, 73–93. Flaherty, J., 2005. Coaching: Evoking Excellence in Others. Butterworth–Heinemann, Oxford, United Kingdom. Fredriksen, D.L., Brem, A., 2017. How do entrepreneurs think they create value? A sci- entific reflection of Eric Ries' lean Startup approach. Int. Entrep. Manag. J. 13, 169–189. Gioia, D., Manz, C., 1985. Linking cognition and behavior: a script processing inter- pretation of vicarious learning. Acad. Manag. Rev. 10, 527–539.Grant, A., 2006. A personal perspective on professional coaching and the development of coaching psychology. Int. Coach. Psychol. Rev. 1, 12–22. Harden,J.,2000.Language,discourseandthechronotope:applyingliterarytheorytothe narratives in health care. J. Adv. Nurs. 31, 506–512. Hargrove, R., 2000. Masterful Coaching Fieldbook. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA. Harms, R., 2015. Self-regulated learning, team learning and project performance in en- trepreneurship education: learning in a lean startup environment. Technol. Forecast. Social. Change 100, 21–28. Harms, R., Marinakis, Y., Walsh, S.T., 2015. The lean startup for materials ventures and other science-based ventures: under what conditions is it useful? Transl. Mater. Res. 2, 1–8. Hochberg, Y.V., 2015. Accelerating entrepreneurs and ecosystems: the seed
Mater. Res. 2, 1–8. Hochberg, Y.V., 2015. Accelerating entrepreneurs and ecosystems: the seed accelerator. Innov. Policy Econ. 16, 25–51. Hytti, U., O’Gorman, C., 2004. What is “enterprise education”? An analysis of the ob- jectives and methods of enterprise education programs in four European Countries.Educ. + Train. 46, 11–23. Jacob, M., Lundqvist, M., Hellsmark, H., 2003. Entrepreneurial transformations in the Swedish university system: the case of Chalmers University of Technology. Res. Policy 32, 1555–1568. Kahneman, D., 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Macmillan, New York, NY. Koskinen, K.U., 2005. Metaphoric boundary objects as coordinating mechanisms in the knowledge sharing of innovation processes. Eur. J. Innov. Manag. 8, 323–335. Kutzhanova, N., Lyons, T.S., Lichtenstein, G.A., 2009. Skill-based development of en- trepreneurs and the role of personal and peer group coaching in enterprise devel-opment. Econ. Dev. Q. 23, 193–210. Ladd,T.,Lyytinen,K.,Gemmell,R.,2015.Howcustomerinteractionandexperimentation advance new venture concepts in a cleantech accelerator. Acad. Manag. Proc. 1–37. Lundqvist, M., 2014. The importance of surrogate entrepreneurship for incubated Swedish technology ventures. Technovation 34, 93–100. Lundqvist, M., Williams-Middleton, K., 2008. Sustainable wealth creation beyond shareholder value. In: Wankel, C., Stoner, J. (Eds.), Innovative Approaches to GlobalSustainability. Palgrave MacMillan, New York, NY, pp. 39–62. Lynn, G., Morone, G., Paulson, A., 1996. Marketing and Discontinuous Innovation: the probe and learn process. Calif. Manag. Rev. 38, 8–38. Mansoori, Y., 2018. Entrepreneurial Methods as Vehicles of Entrepreneurial Action (Doctoral dissertation). Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden. Martinez, M., Yang, T., Aldrich, H., 2011. Entrepreneurship as an evolutionary process: research progress and challenges. Entrep. Res. J. 1 (Article 4). Maurya, A., 2012. Running Lean: Iterate from Plan A to a Plan that Works.
Res. J. 1 (Article 4). Maurya, A., 2012. Running Lean: Iterate from Plan A to a Plan that Works. O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, CA. McAdam, M., Miller, K., McAdam, R., 2016. Situated regional university incubation: a multi-level stakeholder perspective. Technovation 50, 69–78. McGrath, R., MacMillan, I., 2000. The Entrepreneurial Mindset: strategies for ContinuouslyCreatingOpportunityinanAgeofUncertainty.HarvardBusinessPress,Cambridge, MA. Mian, S., Lamine, W., Fayolle, A., 2016. Technology business incubation: an overview of the state of knowledge. Technovation 50–51, 1–12. Miles, M., Huberman, A., 1984. Drawing valid meaning from qualitative data. Educ. Res. 15, 20–30. Nehls, N., 1995. Narrative pedagogy: rethinking nursing education. J. Nurs. Educ. 34, 204–210. Nonaka, L., Takeuchi, H., Umemoto, K., 1996. A theory of organizational knowledge creation. Int. J. Technol. Manag. 11, 833–845. O’Broin, A., Palmer, S., 2009. Co-creating an optimal coaching alliance: a cognitive be- havioural coaching perspective. Int. Coach. Psychol. Rev. 4, 184–194. Ollila, S., Williams-Middleton, K., 2011. The venture creation approach: integrating en- trepreneurial education and incubation at the university. Int. J. Entrep. Innov. Manag. 13, 161–178. Osterwalder, A.,Pigneur,Y.,Tucci,C.,2005.Clarifyingbusinessmodels:origins,present, and future of the concept. Commun. Assoc. Inform. Syst. 15, 1–38. Parsloe, E., 1999. The Manager as Coach and Mentor, second ed. CIPD Publishing, London, United Kingdom. Parsloe, E., Leedham, M., 2009. Coaching and Mentoring: Practical Conversations to Improve Learning. Kogan Page Publishers, London, UK. Pauwels, C., Clarysse, B., Wright, M., Van Hove, J., 2016. Understanding a new genera- tion incubation model: the accelerator. Technovation 50–51, 13–24. Peterson, D., Millier, J., 2005. The alchemy of coaching: “you’re good, Jennifer, but you could be really good.”. Consult. Psychol. J.: Pract. Res. 57, 14–40. Ragins, B., Cotton, J., Miller, J., 2016.
good.”. Consult. Psychol. J.: Pract. Res. 57, 14–40. Ragins, B., Cotton, J., Miller, J., 2016. Marginal mentoring: the effects of type of mentor, quality of relationship, and program design on work and career attitudes. Acad. Manag. 43, 1177–1194. Read, S., Sarasvathy, S.D., 2005. Knowing what to do and doing what you know: effec- tuation as a form of entrepreneurial expertise. J. Priv. Equity 9, 45–62. Ries, E., 2011. The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation toCreateRadicallySuccessfulBusinesses.RandomHouseDigital,Inc.,NewYork,NY. Rymer, J., 2002. “Only connect”: transforming ourselves and our discipline through co- mentoring. J. Bus. Commun. 39, 342–363. Schein, E., 1987. Process Consultation: Lessons for Managers and Consultants. Addison- Wesley OD Series, Reading, MA. Soetanto, D., Jack, S., 2016. The impact of university-based incubation support on the innovation strategy of academic spin-offs. Technovation 50, 25–40. Spence, G., Grant, A., 2007. Professional and peer life coaching and the enhancement ofY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 46
goal striving and well-being: an exploratory study. J. Posit. Psychol. 2, 185–194. Strauss, A., Corbin, J., 1998. Basics of Qualitative Research: Procedures and Techniques for Developing Grounded Theory. SAGE Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA. Sue-Chan, C., Latham, G., 2004. The relative effectiveness of external, peer, and self- coaches. Appl. Psychol. 53, 260–278. Sull, D., 2004. Disciplined entrepreneurship. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 46, 71–77. Van Weele, M., Van Rijnsoever, F., Eveleens, C., 2015. Start-EU-up! International in- cubation practices to overcome the main challenges of the Western European en- trepreneurial ecosystem, In: DRUID15 Rome – The Relevance of Innovation. VanWeele,M.,vanRijnsoever,F.J.,Nauta,F.,2017.Youcan'talwaysgetwhatyouwant: How entrepreneur's perceived resource needs affect the incubator's assertiveness.Technovation 59, 18–33. Vaughan, D., 2009. Analytic ethnography. In: The Oxford Handbook of Analytical Sociology, pp. 688–711. Whitmore, J., 1992. Coaching for Performance. Nicholas Brealey, London, United Kingdom. Wise,S.,Valliere,D.,2014.Theimpactonmanagementexperienceontheperformanceof start-ups within accelerators. J. Private Equity 9–19. Wright, M., 2007. Academic Entrepreneurship in Europe. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, United Kingdom. York, J.,Danes,J., 2014.Customerdevelopment, innovation,anddecision-makingbiases in lean startup. J. Small Bus. Strategy 24, 21–39.Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 47
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Technovation journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/technovation The influence of the lean startup methodology on entrepreneur-coach relationships in the context of a startup accelerator Yashar Mansoori, Tomas Karlsson, Mats Lundqvist Chalmers University of Technology, Entrepreneurship and Strategy, Vera Sandbergs Allé 8B, 41296 Göteborg, Sweden ARTICLE INFO Keywords: The lean startup methodologyEntrepreneurial coaching Startup accelerator Entrepreneur-coach relationshipVicarious learningABSTRACT Theleanstartupmethodologyhasbeensteadilygainingwidespreadpopularityduringthepastfewyears.Aspart of this trend, startup accelerator programs have begun to adopt the methodology as their main organizing framework.At thesame time,coachesandtheircoaching practiceslieatthecoreofmanyacceleratorprograms. Despitethewidespreadrecognitionoftheimportanceofcoaching,thereisalackofknowledgeofhowtheroleofcoaches in accelerators interacts with the lean startup methodology. Using an ethnographic study design com-bined with interviews, this study investigates entrepreneur-coach relationships in the context of a university- based accelerator. The findings show that the lean startup methodology influences how entrepreneur-coach relationships evolve and how the formation and progression of these relationships facilitate learning amongentrepreneurs. The lean startup methodology creates conflict between the information collected from customers and the (perceived) authority of coaches. However, the entrepreneurial method also enables the coaching to be evolutionaryandassumption-changing.Suggestionsaremadeformitigatingchallengesrelatedtotheprogressofentrepreneurial activities and entrepreneur-coach relationships. 1. Introduction This study examines how adhering to the principles of the lean startupmethodology influencesentrepreneur-coachrelationships inthe context of an accelerator program. In recent years, accelerators have been gaining increasing
inthe context of an accelerator program. In recent years, accelerators have been gaining increasing popularity (Hochberg, 2015). From a public policy perspective, it is widely acknowledged that university-based accelerators are important components of regional entrepreneurial ecosystems (McAdam et al., 2016). Accelerators are often limited- duration programs aimed at helping entrepreneurs to define their ideas and build their first prototypes. Traditionally, organizers of such pro- grams have resorted to business planning approaches as organizing framework in order to structure the training and other services they offer. However, as a response tothe move awayfrombusinessplanning approaches,manyacceleratorsnowadopttheleanstartupmethodology (Blank and Dorf, 2012; Ries, 2011), which focuses on iterative learningfrom potential customers (York and Danes, 2014). Many highly ranked accelerators, such as Y Combinator, Techstars, 500 Startups, and An- gelPad structure their services following the guidelines of the lean startup methodology. Although coaching is not addressed as part of the lean startup methodology, this study shows that the methodology in- fluences, in markedly disticnt ways, how knowledge is communicated withinentrepreneur-coachrelationships.Asaresult,thesupportiveanddevelopmental role of coaches (Ladd et al., 2015; Pauwels et al., 2016) changes from mentor and vehicle of knowledge transfer, in line with business planning, to facilitator of a hypothesis-testing practice, as per the lean startup methodology (Christiansen, 2009). Theemergenceoftheleanstartupmethodology hasintroducednew ways in which accelerators and services as part of them are structured. In addition to providing entrepreneurs with a more structured way of thinking and acting, the lean startup methodology provides an orga- nizing framework in which coaches can arrange their activities in new ways. The principles and instructions of the lean startup methodology are being widely implemented as
The principles and instructions of the lean startup methodology are being widely implemented as part of lectures, seminars, and coaching sessions offered at accelerators. In this vein, coaches employ the structure of the methodology to organize their coaching sessions. These sessions are generally centered on topics such as customer in- teraction,hypothesisvalidation,andtheanalysisofgathereddata,allof which are at the center of the instructions of the lean startup metho-dology. The practices of the methodology are embedded within the coaching sessions and contribute to the regularities or irregularities of coaching practices. Despite the prevalence of accelerators and the importance of the role of coaches, relatively few studies have examined entrepreneur- coach relationships in any depth. Those that mention coaching tend to be limited to introducing the existence of such role, rather than https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2019.03.001 Received 17 March 2017; Received in revised form 22 February 2019; Accepted 7 March 2019E-mail address: yashar.mansoori@chalmers.se (Y. Mansoori).Technovation 84–85 (2019) 37– 47 Available online 14 March 2019 0166-4972/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license  (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/). T
providingdetailedexaminationsofthecoachingpracticesandnatureof entrepreneur-coach relationships (Adomdza, 2014). Against this back- drop, the purpose of this study is to investigate entrepreneur-coach relationships at a university-based accelerator in Sweden that follows the lean startup methodology. The research question guiding this study was ‘how the incorporation of the lean startup methodology into the processes of an accelerator influences the dynamics of relationships between entrepreneurs and their assigned coaches’? Here, an ethno- graphic approach is used to examine the lectures, seminars, and coaching sessions that form the backbone of a 15-week accelerator program. In addition, ten interviews with entrepreneurs and six inter- views with coaches were conducted to complement the extensive non- participatoryobservationaldata.Thisstudycontributestotheliterature on accelerators, entrepreneurial coaching, and the lean startup meth- odology in two ways. First, it develops a more in depth understanding of the role of coaches and coaching sessions in terms of both form and content. Second, it traces the instructions of the lean startup metho- dology throughout and beyond the coaching sessions to investigate the influence of the methodology as an organizing framework. 2. Frame of reference Thecurrentresearchsettinginvolvesthreemainspaceswithvarious levels of overlap: the lean startup methodology, entrepreneurial coaching and accelerators. These components will, therefore, be in- troduced here in this order to then qualify the ethnographic study where interrelations between these components will be investigated. 2.1. The lean startup methodology The lean startup methodology by Ries (2011) was inspired by the principles of the lean manufacturing (avoiding waste and optimizing resource spending) and the work of Steve Blank (Blank, 2006). The ideas in the methodology are reminiscent of contributions such as “disciplined entrepreneurship” (Sull, 2004),
methodology are reminiscent of contributions such as “disciplined entrepreneurship” (Sull, 2004), “discovery-driven plan- ning” (McGrath and MacMillan, 2000) and “probe and learn” (Lynn et al., 1996). The methodology benefits from a set of tools taken from other theories and methods, such as the customer development fra- mework (Blank and Dorf, 2012), rapid prototyping of design thinking (Brown, 2008), and agile software development principles (Dybå and Dingsøyr, 2008). Core to the lean startup methodology is validated learning throughpurposeful experimentation,inwhich the effectuation principlesofflexibilityandaffordableloss(ReadandSarasvathy,2005) areapplied(FredriksenandBrem,2017).Theleanstartupmethodology has a unique language, structure and strict advice. Therefore, it can be viewed as a metaphorical boundary object, enabling the wielders of the method to display their expertise (Koskinen, 2005). Validated learning highlights progress through a process of testing a set of carefully for- mulated assumptions and analyzing solid empirical data obtained from real customers (Maurya, 2012; Ries, 2011). The lean startup methodology as a cyclical process is grounded in three main sets of activities. First, entrepreneurs dissect their business ideas into testable assumption and map them onto the business model canvas (Osterwalder et al., 2005) as testable assumptions. This gra- phical respresentation contains all the key aspects that entrepreneurs should be relatively certain about. Second, entrepreneurs engage in a process designed to test the assumptions in realtion to their business ideas (Ries, 2011). The sequence of these tests is determined by the perceivedcriticalityoftheresultsofthetestsforthecontinuationofthe process. One way to test the assumptions is to prepare a “minimum viable product” (MVP). An MVP is a version of the product containing the smallest set of features, built using the minimum amount of time and resources and provides entrepreneurs with the --- features, built using the minimum amount of time and resources and provides entrepreneurs with the information re- quired to validate or invalidate their assumptions (Ries, 2011). After a rigorous evaluation of the results, the invalidated assumptions are re- placed by new assumptions and are then re-tested. This processcontinues until a reasonable number of tests validates the critical as-sumptions. Finally, entrepreneurs decide on the remaining assumptions based on their interactions with potential customers. A key concept in theleanstartupmethodologyisthe“product-marketfit.”Thefitimplies that the product idea has a market and, therefore, there are customers willing to pay for the value offered by the product (Blank and Dorf, 2012). The ultimate goal of the process is to guide entrepreneurs in finding this fit. 2.2. Entrepreneurial coaching Coachinghas beendefined in severalways: asallactivities aimedat bringing out the potential of individuals (Hargrove, 2000); all delib- erate intervention activities used to help individuals to develop and achieve their specified goals (Aas and Vavik, 2015); a structured two- way process to developing skills and competencies through “assess- ment, guided practical experience, and regular feedback” (Parsloe, 1999:1); and a set of practices to help individuals to learn (Whitmore, 1992). Coaching is suggested to be instrumental as a support measure (Audet and Couteret, 2012), as a structured framework to steer com- munications and conversations (Spence and Grant, 2007), as a tool to organize peer-learning (Kutzhanova et al., 2009), as a way to create a sense of peer pressure (Van Weele et al., 2015), as a function that createsasenseofbelongingtoalargergroup(Kutzhanovaetal.,2009), and, most importantly, as an aid to encourage action (Cooper et al., 2012; Flaherty, 2005). Inthisstudy,entrepreneurialcoachingisdefinedasthesupportthat entrepreneurs receive in the early stages of their entrepreneurial ac-tivities to help them to develop
receive in the early stages of their entrepreneurial ac-tivities to help them to develop and acquire necessary skills (Audet and Couteret,2012).Thekeytocoaching,ingeneral,andtoentrepreneurial coaching in particular is the notion of learning (Bachkirova et al., 2014).Often,ratherthanresolvingspecificproblems,coachesprovidea contextwithinwhichentrepreneurscandeveloptheskillsandexpertise needed to solve the problems that may arise. Coaching includes all the various ways of helping entrepreneurs in startup accelerator programs, where entrepreneurs lack knowledge, skills, and experience. Therefore, coaches can help entrepreneurs to extract entrepreneur-driven solu- tions. Although sometimes valuable, it is not necessarily the startup background and practical experience of coaches that defines en- trepreneur-coach relationships (Britton, 2010). The productiveness of the relationship between coaches and en- trepreneurs is influenced by factors such as the equality of power be- tween the two sides of the coaching relationship, the extent to which a culture of collaborative learning is promoted, the effectiveness of communication, and the tools and techniques used to facilitate the developmental efforts (Cox et al., 2014; Schein, 1987). In order to promote openness and trust within an entrepreneurial coaching re- lationship, it is advised to avoid a hierarchy between the coach (who can be viewed as the facilitator of learning) and the entrepreneur (O’Broin and Palmer, 2009; Schein, 1987). Moreover, communications can be facilitated effectively through practices such as “listening, clar- ifying, encouraging reflection and criticality, and questioning” (Cox et al., 2014:6), which have been shown to be reliable vehicles for col- laborative learning (Cox, 2013). Therefore, the quality of these re- lationships impacts effective learning by facilitating and speeding up learning episodes. Entrepreneurial coaching relationships can be divided into three archetypes: functionalist,
Entrepreneurial coaching relationships can be divided into three archetypes: functionalist, engagement, and evolutionary. In a function- alistcoaching relationship,thedesiredoutcomeofthecoachingepisodes isincrementalchangestoroutinesandactivities,withnomajorrevision of entrepreneurs’ existing norms and values (Brockbank, 2008). Func- tionalist coaching is directive, didactic, and advice-driven in principle (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). The learning outcome in this style is single-loop learning (Argyris and Schön, 1974). A drawback of this approach is that it views the entrepreneur as “detached, disembodied, and passive” (Brockbank and McGill, 2006:30).Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 38 --- In anengagement coaching relationship, similar to functionalist coaching, the desired outcome is incremental improvement in routines, while preserving existing norms and values. However, in this case, this happens in a non-directive manner. To minimize resistance from en- trepreneurs, the coach adopts a humanistic and relationship-driven approach (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). This relationship places greater value on learning and change (Brockbank, 2008). The learning outcome in this style is also single-loop learning (Argyris and Schön, 1974) but includes the potential for reflection (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). In contrast to functionalist and engagement coaching, in an evolu- tionary coaching relationship, the desired outcome is transformational development induced by fundamental changes to the established as- sumptions held by entrepreneurs. Similar to an engagement coach, an evolutionary coach adopts a humanistic and relationship-driven ap- proach to learning (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). The learning out- come in this style is double-loop learning (Argyris and Schön, 1974), which promotes the personal and professional development of en- trepreneurs, leading them to improve their existing norms and values (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). Here, the coach helps entrepreneurs to take ownership of their learning and development. The main distin- guishingfeatureofevolutionarycoachingistheplatformitprovidesfor 'reflective dialogue' with entrepreneurs (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). In the context of this study, coaches engage in an evolutionary ap- proach,investingmoretimeinassistingthoughtandreflectionasaway to facilitate learning and development rather than directing en- trepreneurs’ actions. 2.3. Startup accelerators The empirical setting of this study is that of startup accelerators. As a rapidly growing phenomenon, startup accelerators are viewed as a mutation of incubators (Wise and Valliere, 2014), providing more ser- vices than those offered by traditional
incubators (Wise and Valliere, 2014), providing more ser- vices than those offered by traditional incubators to early-stage busi- nesses. In comparison with incubators, accelerators are “fixed-term, cohort-based programs” that include educational and inspirational elements inaddition tocoachingand “culminateina public pitchevent or a demo day” in front of a group of potential investors (Cohen and Hochberg, 2014:4). One of the first accelerators, Y Combinator, was established in the United States in 2005, and has since inspired many others. As part of accelerator programs, entrepreneurs are offered a work space, educational and coaching possibilities, and access to the accelerator’s alumni, network of coaches, and organizers, including venture capitalists, experienced entrepreneurs, and corporate execu- tives (Bruneelet al.,2012). Thesupportive environment of accelerators provides peer learning and peer support, allowing for opportunities for networking and referrals. Being affiliated with an accelerator con- tributes to creating an entrepreneur’s brand and actsas a legitimization tool, helping the entrepreneur to establish contacts and raise necessary funds (Wise and Valliere, 2014). In contrast with incubators, an im- portant value-added service is the role played by coaches. However, despite the growing interest in accelerators from policymakers, private and public investors, universities, and even corporations (Mian et al., 2016), little is known about the role of coaches and their coaching in the context of accelerators. This study relies on data gathered from an accelerator housed by Chalmers Ventures, the incubation and seed-funding subsidiary of Chalmers University of Technology in Sweden. Chalmers is recognized as an entrepreneurial university that emphasizes venture creation (Berggren, 2011; Clarysse and Bruneel, 2007; Jacob et al., 2003; Lundqvist, 2014; Lundqvist and Williams-Middleton, 2008; Ollila and Williams-Middleton, 2011; Wright, 2007). The
Lundqvist and Williams-Middleton, 2008; Ollila and Williams-Middleton, 2011; Wright, 2007). The accelerator program runs for 15 weeks and offers access to its network, coaching, and educational facilities for up to 20 entrepreneurial teams in each cohort. Likemostaccelerators,theaimofthisacceleratorprogramistohelp a business idea or an existing venture to become growth andinvestment-ready (Davila et al., 2010). The accelerator program offersoffice spaces, networking and financing events, dedicated business coaching,andvisitsfromserialentrepreneursandculminatesinademo day. The program bears direct resemblance to the Y Combinator pro- gram in terms of its structure. However, the competition to get into the studied accelerator is lower than Y Combinator, and a consequence is that the ventures in the studied accelerator are younger than those in Y Combinator. Entrepreneurs apply to join the accelerator program while in the earlystagesofthedevelopmentoftheirideasandareputingroupswith assigned coaches. The coaches include successful entrepreneurs, ac- celerator program alumni, venture capitalists, lawyers, angel investors, andcorporateexecutives.Theacceleratorprogramalsooffersanumber of educational lectures covering a wide range of topics in line with the lean startup methodology. The program is structured into three phases, each lasting five weeks. After the second phase, there is a selection process, with almost half of the teams being eliminated. The remaining teams continue through the third phase before pitching their ideas, receivingfeedback,andansweringquestionsposedbyinvestorsandthe public on the final demo day. 3. Data and methods 3.1. Research methods Ithasbeenarguedthatthecombinationofethnography,interviews, andotherdata-collectionmethodscanresultinimportantcontributions as this provides mechanism-based explanations and rich descriptive accounts that cross and connect different levels of analysis (Vaughan, 2009). Ethnography can be understood as “research
connect different levels of analysis (Vaughan, 2009). Ethnography can be understood as “research conducted by si- tuating oneself in a social setting to observe and analyze individual interaction in order to understand some complex social process, event,activity, or outcome” (Vaughan, 2009:690). Ethnographers spend time in their research setting and become immersed in the activities that need attention, including the beginning and ending points. Further- more,theyenterthefieldwithnoclearguidelinesastohowtheprocess might evolve. According to Aldrich and Baker (1997), there is a lack of ethnographical research in the field of entrepreneurship, to which Martinez et al. (2011) concur. This study adopts ethnography as a re- search method to investigate the actions and social interactions in the context of a startup accelerator program. Thus, the empirical evidence is based on ethnographic data, including exploratory non-participant observations,interviews,andsecondarydata,assistingingeneratingan empirically grounded understanding of entrepreneur-coach relation- ships. 3.2. Sample The sample initially consisted of 17 entrepreneurial teams and 41 entrepreneurs. All teams were composed of at least two entrepreneurs and were encouraged to participate in all scheduled activities. The sample included a broad range of participants in terms of age, gender, education, and experience. The accelerator program included three phases. At the end of the second phase, the organizers identified 10 teamstoproceedtothethirdphase.Thus,thesamplewaslimitedtothe remaining teams for further interviews and a closer examination of their processes, although the data gathered through observation up to that point included all 17 teams. This was simply the result of a lack of access to the eliminated teams. During some of the interviews, team members other than the lead entrepreneurs participated, but for sim- plicity, they were treated as a single group in the analysis of the col- lected data. For
for sim- plicity, they were treated as a single group in the analysis of the col- lected data. For instance, statements from entrepreneurs who were part of Startup 1 are presented as S1. Tables 1 and 2 provide additional details about the entrepreneurs and coaches, respectively.Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 39
3.3. Data collection The empirical data for this study were collected through ethno- graphicfieldresearchduringspringandsummerof2016.Thisincluded non-participant observations, in-depth semi-structured interviews, weekly qualitative questionnaires, the cohort’s public Slack channel (a cloud-based team collaboration tool), and field notes collected during the coaching sessions, lectures, and inspirational seminars. During the 15 weeks of the accelerator program, the lead author was physically present at the accelerator and followed nearly all of the activities. All lectures, inspirational seminars, and coaching sessions were recorded. During the weekly coaching sessions, the lead author attended one of the sessions and recorded the other two. Interviews with the lead en- trepreneurs of the 10 teams who proceeded to the third phase, as well as with the six coaches involved in the accelerator program were con- ducted. The interviews lasted 80min each, on average, and were re- corded and transcribed verbatim. Three sets of qualitative ques- tionnaires were sent on a weekly basis: one at the beginning of the week, one after the coaching sessions, and one after the lectures and inspirational seminars. The entrepreneurs were asked about the activ- ities they had undertaken, their learning, and their plans for the up- comingweek.Allthepublicinteractionsbetweentheentrepreneursand their coaches as well as other entrepreneurs, which were documented on the program’s Slack channel were closely monitored and coded. Table 3demonstrates the data sources. 3.4. Data analysis The data were analyzed inductively using grounded methodology principles, following natural language coding and categorization (Miles and Huberman, 1984). All empirical data were imported into a quali- tative data analysis application (Atlas.ti) and open-coded at the level of smallest meaning units (Strauss and Corbin, 1998). The codes include a wide range of topics, such as inclusion of the lean startup --- explicitly by the instructions of the lean startup methodology. Employinganethnographicresearch design,thisstudyoffersimportant insight into the coaching practices and how the inclusion of the lean startup methodology helps to influence and shape coaching practices.The discussion section is divided into four sub-sections: the structure ofthe coaching sessions, the dynamics governing the entrepreneur-coach relationships, the paradox of data in relation to authority, and the vi- carious learning that occurs during these coaching sessions. 5.1. The structure of coaching sessions The experience of entering an accelerator program and facing si- milar challenges has been found to cultivate strong ties and create a common identity among entrepreneurs (Bruneel et al., 2012). Previous studies have shown that participating in lectures and inspirational seminars relevant to problems faced by entrepreneurs contributes to an increased knowledge base among the participants (Davidsson and Honig, 2003). In the current case, coaches organized the coaching sessions following the lean startup methodology to encourage en- trepreneurs to act and to allow for their transparent evaluation. This included encouraging entrepreneurs to share detailed accounts of their activities specific to the lean startup methodology in order to build bonds among them. The setup of the studied accelerator program culminated in the announcement of a winning team that was offered investment and created a competitive environment. Therefore, there was both a com- munal feeling among entrepreneurs where collaborating and co- operating was the norm as well as a sense of competition and rivalry (Bøllingtoft, 2012). The adoption of the lean startup methodology fos- teredbotheffects.Onthe onehand,itledto entrepreneurscarryingout activities to attract the attention of their coaches. On the other hand, entrepreneurs used coaching sessions based on the lean startup meth-
and Corbin, 1998). The codes include a wide range of topics, such as inclusion of the lean startup methodology as part of the accelerator program, coaches and their positions of au- thority, the role of coaching sessions in creating legitimacy for the coaches, the impact of the coaching sessions on entrepreneurs’ mental development, and the role of the social setting in developing necessary skills.Tolimitthebroadcategorizationprocess,thedatawerearranged using the codes and categories related to the entrepreneur-coach re- lationships. The rationale behind focusing on these codes and cate- gories, and excluding others, follows the purpose of the study, which revolves around an explicit entrepreneurial method, the pronounced role of coaches, and the social aspects of the coaching sessions. For instance, the category “lack of instructions on the level of tools and tactics”wasexcludedbecauseitpertainstothedesignoftheaccelerator programratherthantoentrepreneur-coachrelationships.Thisstructure providedarichandconcisenarrativeofevents. Table4presentsthemes and categories.4. Findings Inlinewith Table4,thefindingssectionisorganizedintothreesub- sections, corresponding to the three larger themes. Therefore, eachtheme is discussed by providing quotes from the entrepreneurs and coaches for the identified categories. The findings section focuses pri- marily on the impact of incorporating and applying the lean startup methodology on entrepreneur-coach relationships along the three themes of coaching form, coaching content, and coaching context. 4.1. Coaching form The first theme refers broadly to the elements of the accelerator program that impact the structure of coaching sessions. It provides texture to the dynamics of the entrepreneur-coach relationships and offersinsightsintotheroleplayedbytheinstructionsoftheleanstartup methodology. The entrepreneurs and their coaches interacted through individual and group coaching sessions, as well as during educational lectures. A large
through individual and group coaching sessions, as well as during educational lectures. A large number of these interactions were influenced by the ideas and the instructions of the lean startup methodology. The teamof coaches decided to follow a common structure during the coaching sessions. They explicitly asked entrepreneurs to prepare status updates describingtheircontactswithpeopleoutsidetheirteams,pastactivities relatedtovalidatingtheirhypotheses,andplansforupcomingactivities as well as the insights they gathered from those activities (to provide a space for peer learning). This agenda helped to structure the interac- tions between coaches and entrepreneurs in ways that made en- trepreneurs aware of the activities expected of them and, therefore, facilitated their progress in line with the expectations of the coaches. According to the coaches, this agenda was designed to “provide di- rectionandconfidence”[C1,C3,C4],“helptodevelopnewwaysofthinking and necessary skills” [C1, C5], “induce peer pressure and increase en- gagement” [C1, C6], “encourage sharing experiences and helping each other” [C5, C6], and “cultivate a sense of belonging” [C2, C5, C6]. One of the coaches explained the process of setting the agenda as follows: “We satdownanddiscussedafewheadlinesandthenwedugintothose.Icansay that we finally landed on following the lean startup methodology in every- thingwedid”[C1].Moreover,allcoachesclaimedthattheyfollowedthe principles and instructions of the lean startup methodology explicitly when organizing their coaching sessions and their individual relation- shipswiththeteamstheycoached.Considerthefollowingstatement:“I think that the lean startup methodology and all the tools such as business model canvas give the entrepreneurs and us coaches ways to structure in- formation and find gaps in our knowledge to be able to treat some of the uncertainties and make sense of various situations” [C5]. The inclusion of the lean startup methodology also impacted how --- and consider the feedback one gets after thorough evaluation” [S9]. As a result of the lean startup methodology, coaching sessions also created an environment in which entrepreneurs gained self-confidence and self-efficacy. This was facilitated by coaching sessions that pro- videdaforuminwhichentrepreneurscoulddiscusstheirachievements, share their experiences, receive recognition and help other en- trepreneurs, and perceive a level of expertise. Despite failing to fully execute his idea and create the firstprototype, one ofthe entrepreneurs expressed more confidence in pursuing new ideas: “I hope we would continue with our idea but if we do not succeed with it, I feel much more comfortable pursuing a new idea or starting a new company in the future becauseinteractingwithourcoachesgaveusthisexperienceandhelpedusto collect necessary knowledge in relation to starting a new business” [S6]. Another entrepreneur claimed that he now has a clear process for starting a new business: “By completing this accelerator program and participating in the coaching sessions, I believe it is more accessible for us to pursue another idea because I have the experience. Our participation in the coaching sessions and learning from our coaches make me believe that we have a much better overview of the entrepreneurial process” [S2]. In addition to higher self-confidence, entrepreneurs generally ex- pressed higher self-efficacy. Having access to new ways of doing things was instrumental in their perceived self-efficacy. They reported that beinginstructedbythecoachesabouttheleanstartupmethodologyhas helped to improve their chances of success, both during and after the acceleratorprogram:“Iamalreadyresearchinganumberofdifferentideas at the moment.I definitely feelnow thatI have ahigher chance ofbecoming successful at starting my business than if I have not learned about the [the lean startup] methodology” [S8]. In addition to providing content and form, the inclusion of the lean startup
sense of various situations” [C5]. The inclusion of the lean startup methodology also impacted how coaches were viewed by the entrepreneurs during the coaching ses-sions. The structure signalled legitimacy of coaches' experience and facilitated trust between them and the entrepreneurs. The explicit ad- herence to the instructions of the lean startup methodology eventually had a positive influence on the entrepreneur-coach relationships andTable 1 Entrepreneurs and their teams. Idea Prototype before the program Prior knowledge of LSMaMajor changes Finished prototype (S1) Online diagnosis of urinary tract infection No None No Yes (S2) Property registration platform No None No Not completed (S3) Market research platform Yes Limited familiarity Yes Yes (S4) Matchmaking tool for the sublet market No Previous courses Yes Not completed (S5) Digital recruitment service No Limited familiarity Yes Not completed (S6) Sleep optimization app No None No Yes (S7) Online ecological shop No Limited familiarity Yes Yes (S8) Gardeners logging app Yes Limited familiarity No Yes (S9) Smart textile for road workers No None Yes Yes (S10) App for diabetes No None Yes Not completed aThe lean startup methodology.Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 40
created a sense that the coaches possessed the relevant expertise: “I listen to my coach because his knowledge is the sum of years of reading, interactions and solid experiences. I would listen to someone who is an ex- pert in the lean startup processes rather than one who just expresses opi- nions” [S7]. This legitimacy was used directly to resolve internal con- flicts in the teams by referencing the instructions received from the coaches that followed those of the lean startup methodology: “If I said somethingandmyteammembersdisagreedandthenIconfrontedthemwith whatourcoachhadsaid,theyagreedwithmypointaloteasierbecausethey valued our coach’s expertise especially regarding the lean startup metho- dology” [S5]. Moreover, several factors led to the coaches being viewed as figures ofauthority.Placingdemandsontheentrepreneursinlinewiththelean startup methodology, requiring that they structure their activities around them, and the filtering process after the second phase were important factors in the conditioning of the entrepreneur-coach re- lationships.Oneoftheentrepreneursofferedthefollowingstatementin response to a hypothetical question: “If I talk to a bunch of people and then they tell me that an aspect of my idea does not make any sense, and then I consult my coach and he advises me to the contrary, I listen to my coach” [S3]. One of the coaches expressed concern about the un- reasonable trust and authority that this created: “Ifthe coachsaysgoleft and the customer says go right, then the entrepreneurs go left. It is because they have unsound expectations of their coach. Unfortunately, the en- trepreneurshaveabittoomuchrespectforourauthority”[C1]. Inaddition to providing a structure and direction for the coaching sessions and entrepreneur-coach relationships, the instructions of the methodology influenced the thinking and actions of the entrepreneurs. 4.2. Coaching content The second theme refers broadly to the implicit and explicit effects of the lean startup
content The second theme refers broadly to the implicit and explicit effects of the lean startup methodology as the organizing framework on the knowledge content throughout the coaching sessions. Participating in coaching sessions and being exposed to the instructions of the lean startup methodologyledtoa numberofsalientchangesintheactivities undertaken by the entrepreneurs. As part of the coaching sessions, entrepreneurs were asked to map their assumptions about their busi- ness ideas to the business model canvas: “Early in the process, we were supposed to map our critical hypotheses about our target customers, docu- ment them on the [business model] canvas and immediately start talking to themtofigureoutwhetherornottheproblemweaimtosolveactuallyexists outside of our heads” [S4]. Moreover, the coaches explicitly required that entrepreneurs contact potential customers and collect feedback on their ideas: “Our coaches made us goout and talk to as many customers as possible, and report the insights gained through those interactions during coachingsessions.Asitbecamecompetitivebetweentheteams,wepushedallour team members to talk to an even larger number of people” [S1]. The newly introduced activities in the coaching sessions led to new routines and processes: “Every single step we now take is based on the knowledgewe have gathered fromvalidatedsources, mainlyfrom customers and users. Now, every decision we make is based on validated assumptions” [S5]. These new routines eventually translated into new ways ofviewing the venture-creation process. That is, the entrepreneurs’mindset related to reasonable and rational ways to proceed was mod- ified: “Having participated in the coaching sessions and through interacting with our coaches, I think it is fair to believe that when one has an idea, one needs to bounce it back and forth with others in general and customers in particular and consider the feedback one gets after thorough evaluation” [S9]. As a result of the lean
methodology” [S8]. In addition to providing content and form, the inclusion of the lean startup methodology, coupled with the social nature of the coaching sessions, proved to be influential in terms of knowledge accumulation, motivation, and confidence. 4.3. Coaching context The third theme refers broadly to the role played by the context of the coaching sessions in combination with the instructions of the lean startup methodology. This theme focuses on the interactions within the coaching sessions, both between the entrepreneurs and the coaches, and among the entrepreneurs. One of the entrepreneurs described his experience of receiving feedback from his coach as moments that pro- vided himwith newperspectivesthat he had previouslyneglected:“Weattended the coaching sessions each week with the perception that we had confirmed or disconfirmed some of the assumptions about our idea. During these sessions, coaches gave us new angles of perception by arguing in line with the [the lean startup] methodology, even though we thought we had confirmed some aspects of our idea. In many cases, this led us to different directions altogether” [S10]. One of the coaches noted that an importantTable 2 Coaches and their experiences. Experience at the acceleratorCoachtrainingKnowledge about the lean startup methodology Coaching experience Startupscoached (C1) Four years No Trips to California, books, online resources Business plan competitions, Chalmersventures, Chalmers InnovationS1,S2,S4,S5 (C2) Two years No Books and online resources Chalmers Ventures S1,S2,S4,S5 (C3) Four years No Trips to California, books, online resources BornGlobal, Chalmers Innovation S3, S7, S8 (C4) 15 years No Books, online resources, lectures by proponents of the lean startup methodology Chalmers Ventures, Chalmers Innovation S3, S7, S8 (C5) 16 years Yes Books, online resources, lectures by proponents of the lean startup methodology Chalmers Ventures, Chalmers Innovation S6, S9, S10 (C6)One-and-a-half
the lean startup methodology Chalmers Ventures, Chalmers Innovation S6, S9, S10 (C6)One-and-a-half years No Books, online resources, course at Palo Alto Chalmers Ventures S6, S9, S10Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 41
aspect of the coaching sessions was to make the entrepreneurs follow the lean startup methodology, report back on the insights they had gained through customer interactions and capitalize on the social nature of the coaching sessions. The intention was to encourage further interactionsandlearningpossibilitiesduringthecoachingsessions.One of the coaches expressed this as follows: “The point is that we wanted them to get out of the building and conduct interviews, to start interacting with their customers and report them back. We explicitly asked them for solid evidence and the implications of the evidence collected through those interactions”[C3].Ingeneral,thecoachesencouragedtheentrepreneurs to “raise the bar” [C2, C5, C6] by increasing the number of interactions in subsequent weeks. The coaches used the lean startup methodology to add richness to the social interactions of the coaching sessions. They encouraged en- trepreneurstoseethemselvesinthecoachinggroupsasmembersof“the collective brain” [C5] and, therefore, find ways to help their fellow en- trepreneurs by being supportive at all times. Many of the interactions among entrepreneurs were influenced by the instructions of the lean startup methodology. As a result, entrepreneurs shared their experi- ences and received feedback from other entrepreneurs: “We spend a lot of time with each other working out a map of where we should be going, what we should be doing, and planning activities while giving each other feedback. We gave advice or got inspiration. For instance, we got interesting feedback on the experiments we had designed to validate some of ourhypotheses” [S9]. One of the coaches described the dynamics of the coaching sessions as follows: “When entrepreneurs talked about a parti- cular topic, they knew that others may have gone through the same process before.So,theywantedtoknowwhatandhowothershavemanagedvarious issuesandwhattheirlearningwas”[C2].Anothercoachcharacterizedthe coaching sessions as learning --- issuesandwhattheirlearningwas”[C2].Anothercoachcharacterizedthe coaching sessions as learning and developmental episodes, leading to entrepreneursbondoverknowledgeand,thus,benefitfromeachother’s expertise: “The relationships can get more solidified. When two en- trepreneurs with quite different opinions on something discussed during the coaching sessions, they triggered something in each other. The group nature of the coaching sessions allowed for this to happen. I think the bonding over the knowledge and the ensuing friendships between the entrepreneurs were important outcomes of using the lean startup methodology in the coaching sessions” [C1]. In addition, the nature of these coaching sessions provided a ple- thora of possibilities for peer learning and peer pressure. The coaches consciously created a competitive setting, which contributed to the formation of these possibilities. On several occasions, entrepreneurs discussed learning events that had resulted from second-hand experi- ences during the coaching sessions. By virtue of being present at the coaching sessions, entrepreneurs succeeded in accumulating relevant knowledge in line with the lean startup methodology that proved helpfultotheirprocesses.Considerthefollowingstatementfromoneof the entrepreneurs during an informal chat with the lead author: “ITable 3 Empirical data. Data type Sources of data Details Interviews Six coaches 8h 12 entrepreneurs 11h Observations 12 group coaching sessions 12.6h Seven lectures and six seminars 20h Discussions between coaches during pre-program selection meeting 2h Discussions between coaches during mid-program selection meeting 3h 17 elevator pitches during demo day at the end of phase 2 4h 10 15-min pitches during final demo day 3h Presentations PowerPoint slides 27 slide decks Messages and discussions Slack channel communications 40 pages Qualitative questionnaires Three sets of weekly online questionnaires 471 data points Researcher’s notes Non-participant --- remember several occasions during the coaching sessions that one of the entrepreneurs asked a question or shared a specific experience and the question was exactly what I was pondering about or the insights from the experience were very relevant to my own process” [S10]. The coaches viewed the coaching sessions as arenas in which entrepreneurs could give each other feedback and listen to and learn from each other’s ex- periences: “The main goal behind the coaching sessions was to build an effectiveculturewhereentrepreneurssharedexperiencesandgaveeachother leads” [C6]. Moreover, the coaches placed pressure on the entrepreneurs by exposing them to other entrepreneurs’ achievements. They structured the coaching sessions in a way that the entrepreneurs were required to give status updates, including critical insights gained through their interactions with customers. This helped the coaches to create pressure and provide encouragement and, therefore, get entrepreneurs to raise their ambitions: “We certainly wanted to make it more efficient by having peer pressure among the teams. The idea was to expose them to what other teams have really been up to, talking to people, getting a deeper under- standing, and getting more meaningful contacts with potential customers” [C4]. This resulted in a competitive environment in which some en- trepreneurs tried to surpass others by becoming more proactive and persistentinattractingtheattentionoftheircoaches:“Itwasgoodforthe entrepreneurs to listen and see how other teams were progressing in relation to what they were doing. It became somehow a competitive environment. Whenwegavethematask,theydidnotwanttocomebackandbetheworst guys in the room. They knew that at the end of the day, there was a qua- lification for them to be able to continue in the accelerator program. I think thisresultedinthemperformingbetterbybeinginasocialsetting,listeningto other entrepreneurs and contributing to discussions” [C3]. In general, en- trepreneurs were
Three sets of weekly online questionnaires 471 data points Researcher’s notes Non-participant observations in the program 65 pages Recordings 27 group coaching sessions 20h Table 4The emerging themes and categories. Themes Categories Example codes Coaching form •The lean startup methodology and the entrepreneur-coach dynamics•Coaches and the position of authority•Coaches and their legitimacy•Coaching sessions and revised structure•Coaching sessions and facilitation of trust formation•The coaches’ expectations from the entrepreneurs in line with the methodology•Valuing coaches’ opinions higher than external sources of data•Coaches’ knowledge about the methodology creating credibility•Commitment to the lean startup methodology as a structuring framework•Building trust facilitated by the demands of the methodology to share progress and problems Coaching content •Coaching sessions and changes in activities undertaken•Coaching sessions and changes in mindset•Coaching and elevated self-confidence•Coaching and elevated self-efficacy•A systematic approach to validating ideas facilitating interactions with coaches•Understanding changes and openness to flexibility•Group coaching as a tool contributing to self-confidence•Changes in perception related to the difficulty of starting a new business Coaching context •Social aspectsof the coaching sessions(interactions with the coaches)•Social aspects of the coaching sessions (interactions with the other entrepreneurs)•Coaching sessions and opportunities for peer learning•Competition and progress•Coaching sessions and peer pressure•Coaches encouraging more discussion and participation•Entrepreneurs sharing contacts and offer help•Entrepreneurs sharing plans on how they validated their hypotheses•Competition as a motivating factor for entrepreneurs to contact customers•Coaching session as a mechanism to pressure entrepreneurs into more actionY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 42
other entrepreneurs and contributing to discussions” [C3]. In general, en- trepreneurs were positive about the competitive side of the coaching sessions and associated some of their progress to this specific element: “Thecoachesmadeitintoacompetitionbetweenus.Ithinkthatitwaswhen they pushed the hardest that we progressed the most by fighting the mostduring this experience” [S8]. 4.4. A brief summary of the key findings The findings suggest several ways in which the lean startup meth- odology influenced the entrepreneur-coach relationships. The coaches were tasked with providing direction and confidence and help en- trepreneurs to develop their thinking and gather necessary skills. However, the dynamics of the coaching sessions were more similar to a traditional leader–follower structure. The lean startup methodology enabled coaches to create the sense of trust and competence necessary to establish productive entrepreneur-coach relationships. The coaches’ advice in line with the instructions of the lean startup methodology helped to reduce team conflict by resolving intra-team deadlocks. Interestingly, the entrepreneur-coach relationships were shown to beat odds with the basic theoretical principles of the lean startup metho- dology,namely,thathypothesesshouldbetestedagainstempiricaldata collected through interactions with potential customers, rather than having theory or authority be the key principles guiding action. A particular aspect of the coaching sessions was the opportunities it provided for social and peer learning. This affected the entrepreneur- coach relationships, as well as how the coaching sessions were struc- tured and organized. Lastly, entrepreneurs felt they benefited from the competitive environment. 5. Discussion This study explores the relationships between entrepreneurs and their coaches within the context of an accelerator, guided and struc- tured explicitly by the instructions of the lean startup methodology. Employinganethnographicresearch
coaches. On the other hand, entrepreneurs used coaching sessions based on the lean startup meth- odologyasopportunitiestocollectivelymakesenseofthemethodology. Entrepreneurs attempted to understand the instructions of the metho- dology through repeated discussion and reflection, both with coaches and other entrepreneurs. This can be interpreted as a process of knowledgeinternalization(Nonaka etal.,1996)aswell astheadoption of certain guiding principles (Argyris and Schön, 1974). 5.2. The dynamics of entrepreneur-coach relationships Effective relationships between coaches and entrepreneurs and among entrepreneurs are conditioned by the process of their initiation: formally, under a pre-established structure as part of an initiative (e.g., an accelerator program), or informally, through personal relationships between coaches and entrepreneurs (Eby and Lockwood, 2005). In the accelerator program, the formation of these relationships was pre- determined by the organizers. That is, entrepreneurs and coaches were paired based on coaches’ interests in the business ideas. The initial dynamics of the relationships were impacted directly by the introduc- tionoftheleanstartupmethodology.Thiswasanaturaloutcomeofthe methodology defining and dictating the structure and content of the coaching sessions. The effectiveness of these entrepreneur-coach relationships is lar- gely dependent on an environment of trust and closeness. Trust has been identified as a precondition for channeling coaches’ expertise to supportentrepreneurs’learninginasystematicway(Rymer,2002).The methodology directs coaches’ conversations in the coaching sessions and aligns their expectations with the perceived expectations of en- trepreneurs. This provides a common starting point for discussions, highlights coaches’ skills in relation to the lean startup methodology and leads to a sense of mutual trust (Audet and Couteret, 2012). By posing questions that allow entrepreneurs to openly discuss their pro- gress,
Couteret, 2012). By posing questions that allow entrepreneurs to openly discuss their pro- gress, be proud of their progress, and ask for help in domains where they lack experience and expertise, coaches can create trust without seeming incompetent. Trust helps to form the pretext to learning from the coaching ses- sions,namely,acknowledgingalackofexperienceandexpertiserelated to specific tasks and the skills necessary to perform the expected ac- tivities. This signals the need for learning and acquiring newY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 43 --- knowledge, creating closer relationships between entrepreneurs and their coaches (Kutzhanova et al., 2009). It also encourages honest in- teractions with the coaches. Entrepreneurs’ initial and continued com- mitment to fruitful relationships with their coaches and their will- ingness to change their behavior and actions are critical to the quality of interactions (Audet and Couteret, 2012; Peterson and Millier, 2005). Sustained trust between entrepreneurs and their coaches increases the likelihood of adopting the structures put in place by the coaches. Previous studies note that coaches should adopt the role of pro- vidingthenecessarystructureforentrepreneurs(Raginsetal.,2016).In the case of the studied accelerator program, the coaches employed the structure of the lean startup methodology, offering shared mental models and additional points of departure. The methodology facilitates interactions and conversations between entrepreneurs and their coa- ches. By coupling this with inspirational seminars, coaches created le- gitimacy for the lean startup methodology as the structuring frame- work. Inherent in its logic, the methodology encourages flexibility and openness to change, resulting in a space where entrepreneurs are more likely to change their behavior, attitude, knowledge base, and to adopt new tools. The current approach resembles an evolutionary coaching strategy aimed at transforming and developing entrepreneurs by in- ducing fundamental changes to their established assumptions (BrockbankandMcGill,2006).Thiscontrastswithbusinessplan-driven coaching, which tends to be more functional in style. It has been suggested that coaches’ expertise has a direct impact on the outcomes of their coachingactivities (Spence and Grant,2007; Sue- Chan and Latham, 2004). Coaches' advocating for the lean startup methodology contributes to their perceived experience and expertise. Entrepreneurs’ perceptions of coaches’ expertise are important to the coaches’ legitimacy.
Entrepreneurs’ perceptions of coaches’ expertise are important to the coaches’ legitimacy. However, other characteristics of coaches, such as their familiarity with the subject area and previous experience in coaching, too, influence their legitimacy and the entrepreneur-coach relationships. Hence, the lean startup methodology coupled with thecoaches’expertiseinfluenceentrepreneur-coachrelationshipsinspiteof our results showing that expertise is valued more highly than the methodology. 5.3. Paradox of data versus authority An interesting and important finding relates to the role of authority during the coaching sessions and in the entrepreneur-coach relation- ships. Contrary to the ideas of the lean startup methodology, the coa- cheswerenotperceivedasneutralfacilitators,guidingentrepreneursin following the instructions. Owing to the design of the accelerator pro- gram—having three phases and oneround of qualificationat the endof the second phase—the coaches were not seen as facilitators of skill development,butratherasauthorityfigureswhoseopinionswereoften valued more highly than the data. This is in stark contrast to the foundation of the lean startup methodology that the data collected through interactions with potential customers have primacy over prior or outdated knowledge and experience (Blank and Dorf, 2012; Ries, 2011).Coaches’expertiseintermsofbusinessdevelopmentshouldonly matter as a way to create a sense of legitimacy. This leads to a para- doxical situation: coaching may be detrimental to the adoption and execution of the lean startup methodology. To overcome this paradox, coaches would benefit from being aware of their style of advising and how they seek to transform entrepreneurs and should be less concerned about their legitimacy and instructive capabilities. Here, they can instead focus on encouraging team mem- bers to speak to one another and engage in learning (Harms, 2015). At the same time, coaches should generate a base-level legitimacy to be
in learning (Harms, 2015). At the same time, coaches should generate a base-level legitimacy to be able to inspire action and elicit trust from entrepreneurs and to con- vince them to adhere to the lean startup methodology. This highlights the importance of early and clear communication by coaches as facil- itators of skill development in the lean startup methodology and of a processofconsultation(Schein,1987).Thismayrequireacleardivisionof labor between those involved in selecting the teams and those actingas coaches. Note that the structure of the accelerator program provides an environment that elevates the importance of coaches as authority figures, thus undermining the validity and significance of the empirical evidence collected by entrepreneurs. 5.4. Vicarious learning as part of the coaching sessions The structure of the coaching sessions created a space for vicarious learning. Because peer learning is an important goal and outcome of coaching sessions, entrepreneurs are enabled to bypass experience by listeningtoother’sexperiences.Inthisway,entrepreneurscandecrease the economic and psychological cost of trial and error while benefiting from second-hand experiences. Vicarious learning, represented by lis- tening and reflective thinking (Nehls, 1995), is largely conditioned by the values individuals associate with the outcome of the modeled ex- periences(GioiaandManz,1985).Someofthemodeledbehaviorswere communicated to them by coaches and others by entrepreneurs. As a faster method than direct experience, these learning episodes create a larger knowledge base among entrepreneurs and affect their inter- personalrelationshipswithotherentrepreneurs.Theintroductionofthe lean startup methodology and its influence on the structure of the coaching sessions had a direct impact on the progression of vicarious learning episodes. A factor that fosters vicarious learning is the acknowledgement that others can provide insights from their own experiences that are per- --- is the acknowledgement that others can provide insights from their own experiences that are per- ceived asapplicabletoindividuals'owncases(Ellisetal.,2004).This is linked directly to the notions of legitimacy and authority and how they are signaled successfully early on or are acquired in a relationship (Cleggetal.,2007).Thesenotionsbecomeespeciallyrelevantwhenthe ideas communicated from a position of authority and legitimacy are treated as truth and, therefore, not subject to scrutiny and interpreta- tion (Harden, 2000). This suggests that building trust and legitimacy rather than authority is important to facilitating vicarious learning in these settings. In other words, there is value in giving prominence to and encouraging interactions between entrepreneurs to cultivate such learning. In line with the vicarious learning taking place as part of the coaching sessions, inspirational seminars can play an important role because they function as legitimizers of the lean startup methodology. In the studied accelerator, most of the speakers explicitly endorsed the lean startup methodology and were viewed by the entrepreneurs as legitimate figures who were well-versed in terms of the methodology’s core ideas. This created a space that helped entrepreneurs to learn vi- cariously from these speakers, whose success they associated with the methodology, encouraging them to act in accordance with the metho- dology’s instructions. 5.5. Implications for theory The lean startup methodology has gained broad acceptance in the startup community in a relatively short period (Fredriksen and Brem, 2017). However, there is a lack of evidence on the effectiveness of the methodology. There is also little knowledge about the role of en- trepreneurial coaching in accelerators driven by the lean startup methodology. The main implications for theory from this study are around the lean startup methodology used in accelerators, namely: 1) its behavior-changing effects, 2) its trust-building
methodology used in accelerators, namely: 1) its behavior-changing effects, 2) its trust-building qualities, 3) its lim- itations, and 4) its potential to open a new conversation into the pragmatic role of entrepreneurial methods in entrepreneurial coaching practices. First, lean startup methodology used by coaches in an accelerator has notable effects both on entrepreneur-coach relationships and on vicarious learning among entrepreneurs. The transformative effects captured in the current study do not stem only from coaching or ac- celerator context alone but also from the introduction of the leanY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 44
startup methodology bycoaches asanorganizing framework.This is an effect beyond entrepreneurs cultivating strong ties and creating common identity, previously identified in accelerator programs (Bruneel et al., 2012). The lean startup methodology helps to structure entrepreneur-coach interactions, as well as, provides an environment with plenty of opportunities for vicarious learning among en- trepreneurs. Second, trust is a precondition for entrepreneurs to learn in a sys- tematicwayaspreviouslyfound(Rymer,2002).Moreover,Howtrustis built matters greatly. Trust instilled through the lean startup metho- dology as an organizing framework differs from the traditional way coaches have gained trust by using authority, previous success, and personal experiences and position. The latter arguably results in a functional business planning focused coaching style, whereas the lean startup methodology in the current study enabled an evolutionary coaching style transforming and developing entrepreneurs by inducing fundamental changes to their established assumptions (Argyris and Schön, 1974). Paying attention to microlevel interactions between accelerator coaches, their practices and entrepreneurs, thus, provides additional richness to our understanding of the relationship between the accel- erator environment and entrepreneurial performance (Soetanto and Jack, 2016; Van Weele et al., 2017). Our study suggests that the in- troduction of the lean start up methodology in accelerators changes the authority of coaches, possibly rendering them less assertive. While this enabled a more evolutionary coaching style, it also indicates that coaching theory in the context of accelerators need to deal with the dilemma between authority, expertise and assertiveness, on the one hand, and method-orientation on the other hand. Third,thereareanumberofcaveatsinrelationtothecontextofuse for the lean startup methodology. All the entrepreneurs examined here were working on ideas where interaction
startup methodology. All the entrepreneurs examined here were working on ideas where interaction with customers was key. This is in line with the lean startup methodology holding the customer as amain authority. However, ventures with lower levels of technological readiness (e.g., bioengineering or material sciences) might benefit from other methods than the likes of the lean startup methodology (Harms etal.,2015).Also,coachesinmorespecializedacceleratorscouldtakea larger role in offering networks for the benefit of their clients, as sug- gested by Baraldi and Ingemansson-Havenvid (2016) within medical sciences, rather than asking entrepreneurs to take on all such networkbuilding activities. Nevertheless, prescriptive entrepreneurial methods (Mansoori, 2018) such as the lean startup methodology, can play an important role in changing the relationship between the entrepreneurs and their coaches from functionalist and engagement to evolutionary. And fourth, entrepreneurial methods can be seen as vehicles for making coaches into agents of behavioral modifications rather than the de facto bearers of context dependent knowledge (Grant, 2006). As- sumption-changing behavior of entrepreneurs by coaches has pre- viously not been anticipated in research nor in the lean startup meth- odology itself. Research on entrepreneurial coaching, accelerators, and the broader entrepreneurship would benefit from more investigation of applied entrepreneurial methods. It should also strive to improve en- trepreneurial methods and devise novel ones that not only can illumi- nate the path for entrepreneurs but also help enrich the entrepreneur- coach relationships and by proxy benefit startup accelerators. Hence, this study opens a new conversation into the pragmatic role of entrepreneurial methods in understanding the dynamics of en- trepreneurial coaching. Entrepreneurial methods can be seen not only as tools to organize entrepreneurial activities but also as boundary objects (Koskinen,
not only as tools to organize entrepreneurial activities but also as boundary objects (Koskinen, 2005) facilitating the transition of coaches from authoritarian know-it-alls to enablers of behavioral changes in en- trepreneurs (Parsloe and Leedham, 2009). That is, entrepreneurial methodscanactasvehiclesofchangeinentrepreneurialbehavior,from traditional planning approaches to more experimental and experiential styles. This brings to the forefront the need for more thorough in- vestigation of the role of entrepreneurial methods on entrepreneurialoutcomes (Mansoori, 2018). A question that remains is whether the leanstartupmethodologycanactinsimilarwaysinthedailypracticeof entrepreneurs as in formalized and cohort-based context of accel- erators. 5.6. Implications for practice This study highlights the importance of the role of coaches and the challenges in the design of accelerator programs based on the lean startup methodology. When structuring activities, accelerators have traditionally focusedon a combinationof theories on businessplanning and on the experience of coaches. Coaches’ experience is an important factor in entrepreneur-coachrelationships becausethey are regarded as experts and their experience is considered as instruction for further action. However, including the lean startup methodology introduces challenges into the design of such programs and the role played by coaches. Therefore, it may be necessary to reconsider the role of coa- ches in these programs. Coaches need to consider a process of con- sultationthatisempoweredbyavoidingthepitfallsofexercisingexpert authority (Schein, 1987). A possible way forward may be to regard coaches more as facil- itators of knowledge accumulation and skill development than au- thority figures with extensive experience. Coaches should then limit their authoritative advice to suggestions and options (Hytti and O’Gorman, 2004) and allow entrepreneurs to drive their processes. Therefore, they should aim to formulate
2004) and allow entrepreneurs to drive their processes. Therefore, they should aim to formulate their advice and opinions as hypotheses subject to validation rather than as facts based on past ex- periences. Moreover, there may be benefits in dividing the functions of coaches and organizers. In the studied accelerator program, the fact that the coaches were also the organizers led to some entrepreneurs valuing their coaches’ experience more highly than the data they col- lected from potential customers. This contradicts the basics of the lean startup methodology and creates confusion for entrepreneurs. Thus, there is a need to rethink the design of accelerator programs to provide a space that negates cognitive biases such as anchoring and confirma- tion biases (Kahneman, 2011). 6. Conclusion This study examines the dynamics of entrepreneur-coach relation- ships in a university-based accelerator in Sweden based on the lean startup methodology. The main result is that entrepreneur-coach re- lationshipsaredirectlyimpactedbythe introductionoftheleanstartup methodology because the methodology defines and dictates the struc- tureandcontentofthecoachingsessionsand,thus,providesacommon starting point for discussions. The methodology instills trust, en- courages honest interactions with coaches, and increases participants’ willingness to change their behavior. Thus, it contributes to an evolu- tionary coaching strategy aimed at transforming and developing en- trepreneurs. This finding contrasts with business plan-driven coaching, which tends to be more functional in style. Contrary to the ideas of the lean startup methodology, the coaches were not perceived as neutral facilitators, guiding entrepreneurs in following the methodology. Rather, they were seen as authority figures whose opinions were often valued more highly than the data. The structure of the coaching ses- sionscreatedaspaceforvicariouslearningepisodes.Asafastermethod than direct experience, these episodes
than direct experience, these episodes contribute to a larger knowledge base amongentrepreneurs andimpact theirinterpersonal relationships. Future research should investigate how the coaching style and or- ganization of accelerators affect the paradox of coaches being too au- thoritative in relation to entrepreneurs, potentially hampering the en- trepreneurs’ hypothesis-generation and testing efforts. In addition, the legitimacyofthemethodologymightbechallengedbythenatureofthe venturesbeingaccelerated.Futureresearchshouldinvestigatehowwell the methodology suits ventures that have lower technology readiness levels and other characteristics that affect the heterogeneity of theY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 45
accelerator program. Furthermore, focusing on the relationship be- tween novices and seniority in coaching when using the methodology could be a promising avenue for future research. Finally, this study focused on entrepreneur-coach relationships while indicating the im- portance of team learning and other forms of peer learning within an accelerator. Future research should consider how such vicarious and experiential learning are affected by the lean startup methodology and other entrepreneurial methods. References Aas,M.,Vavik,M.,2015.Groupcoaching:anewwayofconstructingleadershipidentity? Sch. Leadersh. Manag. 35, 251–265. Adomdza,G.,2014.Choosingbetweenastudent-runandprofessionallymanagedventure accelerator. Entrep. Theory Pract. 40, 943–956. Aldrich, H., Baker, T., 1997. Blinded by the cites? Has there been progress in en- trepreneurship research? In: Sexton, D., Smilor, R. (Eds.), Entrepreneurship 2000. Upstart Publishing Company, Chicago, IL, pp. 377–400. Argyris, C., Schön, D.A., 1974. Theory in Practice: Increasing Professional Effectiveness. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA. Audet, J., Couteret, P., 2012. Coaching the entrepreneur: features and success factors. J. Small Bus. Enterp. Dev. 19, 515–531. Bachkirova, T., Cox, E., Clutterbuck, D., 2014. Introduction. In: Cox, E., Bachkirova, T., Clutterbuck,D.(Eds.),TheCompleteHandbookofCoaching.Sage,London,pp.1–20. Baraldi, E., Ingemansson-Havenvid, M., 2016. Identifying new dimensions of business incubation: a multi-level analysis of Karolinska Institute's incubation system. Technovation 50, 53–68. Berggren, E., 2011. The entrepreneurial university’s influence on commercialization of academic research–the illustrative case of Chalmers University of Technology. Int. J. Entrep. Small Bus. 12, 429–444. Blank, S., 2006. The Four Steps to the Epiphany. Cafepress, San Francisco, CA.Blank, S., Dorf, B., 2012. The Startup Owner’s Manual: The Step-by-Step Guide for Building a Great Company. K&S Ranch, Incorporated, San
Owner’s Manual: The Step-by-Step Guide for Building a Great Company. K&S Ranch, Incorporated, San Francisco, CA. Bøllingtoft, A., 2012. The bottom-up business incubator: leverage to networking and cooperation practices in a self-generated, entrepreneurial-enabled environment. Technovation 32, 304–315. Britton, J., 2010. Effective Group Coaching: Tried and Tested Tools and Resources for Optimum Coaching results. John Wiley & Sons, Ontario, Canada. Brockbank,A., 2008.Isthecoachingfit forpurpose?Atypologyof coachingandlearning approaches. Coach.: Int. J. Theory, Res. Pract. 1, 132–144. Brockbank, A., McGill, I., 2006. Facilitating Reflective Learning Through Mentoring and Coaching. Kogan Page Publishers, London, United Kingdom. Brown, T., 2008. Design thinking. Harvard Business Review 86, 84–92. Bruneel, J., Ratinho, T., Clarysse, B., Groen, A., 2012. The evolution of business in- cubators: comparing demand and supply of business incubation services across dif- ferent incubator generations. Technovation 32, 110–121. Christiansen, J., 2009. Copying Y Combinator, A Framework for Developing Seed AcceleratorPrograms (MBAdissertation).UniversityofCambridge,UnitedKingdom. Clarysse, B., Bruneel, J., 2007. Nurturing and growing innovative start-ups: the role of policy as integrator. R&D Manag. 37, 139–149. Clegg, S., Rhodes, C., Kornberger, M., 2007. Desperately seeking legitimacy: organiza- tional identity and emerging industries. Organ. Stud. 28, 495–513. Cohen, S., Hochberg, Y., 2014. Accelerating startups: the seed accelerator phenomenon. SSRN Electron. J. 1–16. Cooper,C.,Hamel,S.,Connaughton,S.,2012.Motivationsandobstaclestonetworkingin a university business incubator. J. Technol. Transf. 37, 433–453. Cox, E., 2013. Coaching Understood. SAGE Publications Limited, London, United Kingdom. Cox,E.,Bachkirova,T.,Clutterbuck,D.,2014.Theoreticaltraditionsandcoachinggenres: mapping the territory. Adv. Dev. Hum. Resour. 16, 1–22. Davidsson, P., Honig, B., 2003. The role of social --- Res. J. 1 (Article 4). Maurya, A., 2012. Running Lean: Iterate from Plan A to a Plan that Works. O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, CA. McAdam, M., Miller, K., McAdam, R., 2016. Situated regional university incubation: a multi-level stakeholder perspective. Technovation 50, 69–78. McGrath, R., MacMillan, I., 2000. The Entrepreneurial Mindset: strategies for ContinuouslyCreatingOpportunityinanAgeofUncertainty.HarvardBusinessPress,Cambridge, MA. Mian, S., Lamine, W., Fayolle, A., 2016. Technology business incubation: an overview of the state of knowledge. Technovation 50–51, 1–12. Miles, M., Huberman, A., 1984. Drawing valid meaning from qualitative data. Educ. Res. 15, 20–30. Nehls, N., 1995. Narrative pedagogy: rethinking nursing education. J. Nurs. Educ. 34, 204–210. Nonaka, L., Takeuchi, H., Umemoto, K., 1996. A theory of organizational knowledge creation. Int. J. Technol. Manag. 11, 833–845. O’Broin, A., Palmer, S., 2009. Co-creating an optimal coaching alliance: a cognitive be- havioural coaching perspective. Int. Coach. Psychol. Rev. 4, 184–194. Ollila, S., Williams-Middleton, K., 2011. The venture creation approach: integrating en- trepreneurial education and incubation at the university. Int. J. Entrep. Innov. Manag. 13, 161–178. Osterwalder, A.,Pigneur,Y.,Tucci,C.,2005.Clarifyingbusinessmodels:origins,present, and future of the concept. Commun. Assoc. Inform. Syst. 15, 1–38. Parsloe, E., 1999. The Manager as Coach and Mentor, second ed. CIPD Publishing, London, United Kingdom. Parsloe, E., Leedham, M., 2009. Coaching and Mentoring: Practical Conversations to Improve Learning. Kogan Page Publishers, London, UK. Pauwels, C., Clarysse, B., Wright, M., Van Hove, J., 2016. Understanding a new genera- tion incubation model: the accelerator. Technovation 50–51, 13–24. Peterson, D., Millier, J., 2005. The alchemy of coaching: “you’re good, Jennifer, but you could be really good.”. Consult. Psychol. J.: Pract. Res. 57, 14–40. Ragins, B., Cotton, J., Miller, J., 2016.
the territory. Adv. Dev. Hum. Resour. 16, 1–22. Davidsson, P., Honig, B., 2003. The role of social and human capital among nascent entrepreneurs. J. Bus. Ventur. 18, 301–331. Davila, A., Foster, G., Jia, N., 2010. Building sustainable high-growth startup companies: management systems as an accelerator. Calif. Manag. Rev. 52, 79–105. Dybå, T., Dingsøyr, T., 2008. Empirical studies of agile software development: a sys- tematic review. Inform. Softw. Technol. 50, 833–859. Eby, L., Lockwood, A., 2005. Proteges' and mentors' reactions to participating in formal mentoring programs: a qualitative investigation. J. Vocat. Behav. 67, 441–458. Ellis,R.,Calvo,R.,Levy,D.,Tan,K.,2004.Learningthroughdiscussions.High.Educ.Res. Dev. 23, 73–93. Flaherty, J., 2005. Coaching: Evoking Excellence in Others. Butterworth–Heinemann, Oxford, United Kingdom. Fredriksen, D.L., Brem, A., 2017. How do entrepreneurs think they create value? A sci- entific reflection of Eric Ries' lean Startup approach. Int. Entrep. Manag. J. 13, 169–189. Gioia, D., Manz, C., 1985. Linking cognition and behavior: a script processing inter- pretation of vicarious learning. Acad. Manag. Rev. 10, 527–539.Grant, A., 2006. A personal perspective on professional coaching and the development of coaching psychology. Int. Coach. Psychol. Rev. 1, 12–22. Harden,J.,2000.Language,discourseandthechronotope:applyingliterarytheorytothe narratives in health care. J. Adv. Nurs. 31, 506–512. Hargrove, R., 2000. Masterful Coaching Fieldbook. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA. Harms, R., 2015. Self-regulated learning, team learning and project performance in en- trepreneurship education: learning in a lean startup environment. Technol. Forecast. Social. Change 100, 21–28. Harms, R., Marinakis, Y., Walsh, S.T., 2015. The lean startup for materials ventures and other science-based ventures: under what conditions is it useful? Transl. Mater. Res. 2, 1–8. Hochberg, Y.V., 2015. Accelerating entrepreneurs and ecosystems: the seed --- Mater. Res. 2, 1–8. Hochberg, Y.V., 2015. Accelerating entrepreneurs and ecosystems: the seed accelerator. Innov. Policy Econ. 16, 25–51. Hytti, U., O’Gorman, C., 2004. What is “enterprise education”? An analysis of the ob- jectives and methods of enterprise education programs in four European Countries.Educ. + Train. 46, 11–23. Jacob, M., Lundqvist, M., Hellsmark, H., 2003. Entrepreneurial transformations in the Swedish university system: the case of Chalmers University of Technology. Res. Policy 32, 1555–1568. Kahneman, D., 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Macmillan, New York, NY. Koskinen, K.U., 2005. Metaphoric boundary objects as coordinating mechanisms in the knowledge sharing of innovation processes. Eur. J. Innov. Manag. 8, 323–335. Kutzhanova, N., Lyons, T.S., Lichtenstein, G.A., 2009. Skill-based development of en- trepreneurs and the role of personal and peer group coaching in enterprise devel-opment. Econ. Dev. Q. 23, 193–210. Ladd,T.,Lyytinen,K.,Gemmell,R.,2015.Howcustomerinteractionandexperimentation advance new venture concepts in a cleantech accelerator. Acad. Manag. Proc. 1–37. Lundqvist, M., 2014. The importance of surrogate entrepreneurship for incubated Swedish technology ventures. Technovation 34, 93–100. Lundqvist, M., Williams-Middleton, K., 2008. Sustainable wealth creation beyond shareholder value. In: Wankel, C., Stoner, J. (Eds.), Innovative Approaches to GlobalSustainability. Palgrave MacMillan, New York, NY, pp. 39–62. Lynn, G., Morone, G., Paulson, A., 1996. Marketing and Discontinuous Innovation: the probe and learn process. Calif. Manag. Rev. 38, 8–38. Mansoori, Y., 2018. Entrepreneurial Methods as Vehicles of Entrepreneurial Action (Doctoral dissertation). Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden. Martinez, M., Yang, T., Aldrich, H., 2011. Entrepreneurship as an evolutionary process: research progress and challenges. Entrep. Res. J. 1 (Article 4). Maurya, A., 2012. Running Lean: Iterate from Plan A to a Plan that Works.
good.”. Consult. Psychol. J.: Pract. Res. 57, 14–40. Ragins, B., Cotton, J., Miller, J., 2016. Marginal mentoring: the effects of type of mentor, quality of relationship, and program design on work and career attitudes. Acad. Manag. 43, 1177–1194. Read, S., Sarasvathy, S.D., 2005. Knowing what to do and doing what you know: effec- tuation as a form of entrepreneurial expertise. J. Priv. Equity 9, 45–62. Ries, E., 2011. The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation toCreateRadicallySuccessfulBusinesses.RandomHouseDigital,Inc.,NewYork,NY. Rymer, J., 2002. “Only connect”: transforming ourselves and our discipline through co- mentoring. J. Bus. Commun. 39, 342–363. Schein, E., 1987. Process Consultation: Lessons for Managers and Consultants. Addison- Wesley OD Series, Reading, MA. Soetanto, D., Jack, S., 2016. The impact of university-based incubation support on the innovation strategy of academic spin-offs. Technovation 50, 25–40. Spence, G., Grant, A., 2007. Professional and peer life coaching and the enhancement ofY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 46
goal striving and well-being: an exploratory study. J. Posit. Psychol. 2, 185–194. Strauss, A., Corbin, J., 1998. Basics of Qualitative Research: Procedures and Techniques for Developing Grounded Theory. SAGE Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA. Sue-Chan, C., Latham, G., 2004. The relative effectiveness of external, peer, and self- coaches. Appl. Psychol. 53, 260–278. Sull, D., 2004. Disciplined entrepreneurship. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 46, 71–77. Van Weele, M., Van Rijnsoever, F., Eveleens, C., 2015. Start-EU-up! International in- cubation practices to overcome the main challenges of the Western European en- trepreneurial ecosystem, In: DRUID15 Rome – The Relevance of Innovation. VanWeele,M.,vanRijnsoever,F.J.,Nauta,F.,2017.Youcan'talwaysgetwhatyouwant: How entrepreneur's perceived resource needs affect the incubator's assertiveness.Technovation 59, 18–33. Vaughan, D., 2009. Analytic ethnography. In: The Oxford Handbook of Analytical Sociology, pp. 688–711. Whitmore, J., 1992. Coaching for Performance. Nicholas Brealey, London, United Kingdom. Wise,S.,Valliere,D.,2014.Theimpactonmanagementexperienceontheperformanceof start-ups within accelerators. J. Private Equity 9–19. Wright, M., 2007. Academic Entrepreneurship in Europe. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, United Kingdom. York, J.,Danes,J., 2014.Customerdevelopment, innovation,anddecision-makingbiases in lean startup. J. Small Bus. Strategy 24, 21–39.Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 47
El artículo titulado "The influence of the lean startup methodology on entrepreneur-coach relationships in the context of a startup accelerator" de Yashar Mansoori, Tomas Karlsson y Mats Lundqvist, publicado en la revista Technovation, investiga cómo la metodología lean startup impacta las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches en un programa de aceleración de startups. A continuación, se presenta un resumen detallado de los aspectos clave del texto.

### Contexto y Relevancia
La metodología lean startup ha ganado prominencia en el ámbito del emprendimiento, especialmente en programas de aceleración, que la han adoptado como su marco organizativo principal. A pesar de la importancia del coaching en estos programas, existe una falta de comprensión sobre cómo se relaciona el rol de los coaches con la metodología lean startup.

### Metodología de Investigación
El estudio utiliza un diseño etnográfico combinado con entrevistas para explorar las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches en un acelerador universitario en Suecia. Este enfoque permite una comprensión profunda de las dinámicas en juego, observando conferencias, seminarios y sesiones de coaching a lo largo de un programa de 15 semanas.

### Hallazgos Principales
1. **Influencia de la Metodología Lean Startup**: La metodología afecta la evolución de las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches. A medida que los emprendedores aplican esta metodología, sus interacciones con los coaches se ven influenciadas por principios como el aprendizaje validado y la búsqueda de retroalimentación del cliente.

2. **Conflictos y Desafíos**: Se identifican tensiones entre la información obtenida de los clientes y la autoridad percibida de los coaches. Los emprendedores pueden cuestionar las recomendaciones de los coaches basándose en datos del mercado, lo que puede generar conflictos.

3. **Aprendizaje Evolutivo**: A pesar de los conflictos, la metodología lean permite que el coaching sea un proceso transformador, donde las suposiciones iniciales de los emprendedores pueden ser desafiadas y modificadas a través de la interacción con sus coaches.

### Recomendaciones
El estudio sugiere estrategias para mitigar los desafíos en las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches, buscando mejorar la efectividad del coaching en el contexto de la metodología lean startup.

### Conclusión
El artículo concluye que la metodología lean startup no solo impacta la forma en que los emprendedores interactúan con sus coaches, sino que también crea un entorno de aprendizaje que puede ser conflictivo pero enriquecedor. Comprender estas dinámicas es crucial para optimizar el apoyo que los coaches brindan a los emprendedores en programas de aceleración.

### Contexto de los Programas de Aceleración
Los programas de aceleración han ganado popularidad, especialmente en políticas públicas, donde se reconocen como componentes clave de los ecosistemas emprendedores. Estos programas, que ayudan a los emprendedores a definir ideas y desarrollar prototipos, han cambiado de enfoques de planificación empresarial a la metodología lean startup, que se centra en el aprendizaje iterativo a partir de la retroalimentación de clientes.

### Estructura del Estudio
El estudio se basa en un acelerador asociado a Chalmers Ventures, que ofrece un programa de 15 semanas para equipos emprendedores. Se observa que los coaches, que son profesionales exitosos, utilizan la metodología lean startup para estructurar sus sesiones, enfocándose en la interacción con clientes y la validación de hipótesis.

### Importancia del Coaching
El coaching es fundamental en las etapas iniciales de las actividades emprendedoras, ayudando a los emprendedores a desarrollar competencias necesarias. La relación entre el emprendedor y el coach no se define solo por la experiencia previa del coach, sino también por factores como la igualdad de poder y la efectividad de la comunicación.

### Arquetipos de Coaching
Las relaciones de coaching se clasifican en tres arquetipos:
1. **Coaching Funcionalista**: Busca cambios incrementales sin alterar significativamente las normas existentes.
2. **Coaching de Compromiso**: Busca mejoras incrementales de manera no directiva, promoviendo la reflexión.
3. **Coaching Evolutivo**: Busca un desarrollo transformacional mediante cambios fundamentales en las suposiciones de los emprendedores.

### Recolección y Análisis de Datos
La recolección de datos se realizó mediante observaciones no participantes, entrevistas semiestructuradas y cuestionarios semanales. Los datos fueron analizados inductivamente, utilizando principios de metodología fundamentada.

### Estructura de las Sesiones de Coaching
Las sesiones de coaching se estructuran para fomentar la cohesión entre emprendedores y permitir una evaluación transparente de sus actividades. Se observa un ambiente competitivo que promueve tanto la colaboración como la rivalidad.

### Resultados y Beneficios
Los emprendedores reportan un aumento en su autoeficacia y confianza, atribuyendo esto a las nuevas formas de hacer las cosas aprendidas a través de la metodología lean startup. La inclusión de esta metodología no solo proporciona contenido y estructura, sino que también impacta positivamente en la confianza de los emprendedores.

### Influencia de la Metodología Lean Startup
La metodología lean startup influye en las dinámicas de coaching, promoviendo un aprendizaje colaborativo y un enfoque basado en la evidencia. Los coaches actúan como facilitadores, ayudando a los emprendedores a validar sus hipótesis y a interactuar con clientes potenciales.

### Conclusiones Finales
El estudio destaca la importancia de la metodología lean startup en la transformación de las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches, sugiriendo que esta metodología puede enriquecer la experiencia de aprendizaje y desarrollo en programas de aceleración. Se propone que futuras investigaciones exploren más a fondo cómo los métodos emprendedores pueden influir en el coaching y el desarrollo de startups.
