Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Technovation journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/technovation The influence of the lean startup methodology on entrepreneur-coach relationships in the context of a startup accelerator Yashar Mansoori, Tomas Karlsson, Mats Lundqvist Chalmers University of Technology, Entrepreneurship and Strategy, Vera Sandbergs Allé 8B, 41296 Göteborg, Sweden ARTICLE INFO Keywords: The lean startup methodologyEntrepreneurial coaching Startup accelerator Entrepreneur-coach relationshipVicarious learningABSTRACT Theleanstartupmethodologyhasbeensteadilygainingwidespreadpopularityduringthepastfewyears.Aspart of this trend, startup accelerator programs have begun to adopt the methodology as their main organizing framework.At thesame time,coachesandtheircoaching practiceslieatthecoreofmanyacceleratorprograms. Despitethewidespreadrecognitionoftheimportanceofcoaching,thereisalackofknowledgeofhowtheroleofcoaches in accelerators interacts with the lean startup methodology. Using an ethnographic study design com-bined with interviews, this study investigates entrepreneur-coach relationships in the context of a university- based accelerator. The findings show that the lean startup methodology influences how entrepreneur-coach relationships evolve and how the formation and progression of these relationships facilitate learning amongentrepreneurs. The lean startup methodology creates conflict between the information collected from customers and the (perceived) authority of coaches. However, the entrepreneurial method also enables the coaching to be evolutionaryandassumption-changing.Suggestionsaremadeformitigatingchallengesrelatedtotheprogressofentrepreneurial activities and entrepreneur-coach relationships. 1. Introduction This study examines how adhering to the principles of the lean startupmethodology influencesentrepreneur-coachrelationships inthe context of an accelerator program. In recent years, accelerators have been gaining increasing
inthe context of an accelerator program. In recent years, accelerators have been gaining increasing popularity (Hochberg, 2015). From a public policy perspective, it is widely acknowledged that university-based accelerators are important components of regional entrepreneurial ecosystems (McAdam et al., 2016). Accelerators are often limited- duration programs aimed at helping entrepreneurs to define their ideas and build their first prototypes. Traditionally, organizers of such pro- grams have resorted to business planning approaches as organizing framework in order to structure the training and other services they offer. However, as a response tothe move awayfrombusinessplanning approaches,manyacceleratorsnowadopttheleanstartupmethodology (Blank and Dorf, 2012; Ries, 2011), which focuses on iterative learningfrom potential customers (York and Danes, 2014). Many highly ranked accelerators, such as Y Combinator, Techstars, 500 Startups, and An- gelPad structure their services following the guidelines of the lean startup methodology. Although coaching is not addressed as part of the lean startup methodology, this study shows that the methodology in- fluences, in markedly disticnt ways, how knowledge is communicated withinentrepreneur-coachrelationships.Asaresult,thesupportiveanddevelopmental role of coaches (Ladd et al., 2015; Pauwels et al., 2016) changes from mentor and vehicle of knowledge transfer, in line with business planning, to facilitator of a hypothesis-testing practice, as per the lean startup methodology (Christiansen, 2009). Theemergenceoftheleanstartupmethodology hasintroducednew ways in which accelerators and services as part of them are structured. In addition to providing entrepreneurs with a more structured way of thinking and acting, the lean startup methodology provides an orga- nizing framework in which coaches can arrange their activities in new ways. The principles and instructions of the lean startup methodology are being widely implemented as
The principles and instructions of the lean startup methodology are being widely implemented as part of lectures, seminars, and coaching sessions offered at accelerators. In this vein, coaches employ the structure of the methodology to organize their coaching sessions. These sessions are generally centered on topics such as customer in- teraction,hypothesisvalidation,andtheanalysisofgathereddata,allof which are at the center of the instructions of the lean startup metho-dology. The practices of the methodology are embedded within the coaching sessions and contribute to the regularities or irregularities of coaching practices. Despite the prevalence of accelerators and the importance of the role of coaches, relatively few studies have examined entrepreneur- coach relationships in any depth. Those that mention coaching tend to be limited to introducing the existence of such role, rather than https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2019.03.001 Received 17 March 2017; Received in revised form 22 February 2019; Accepted 7 March 2019E-mail address: yashar.mansoori@chalmers.se (Y. Mansoori).Technovation 84–85 (2019) 37– 47 Available online 14 March 2019 0166-4972/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license  (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/). T
providingdetailedexaminationsofthecoachingpracticesandnatureof entrepreneur-coach relationships (Adomdza, 2014). Against this back- drop, the purpose of this study is to investigate entrepreneur-coach relationships at a university-based accelerator in Sweden that follows the lean startup methodology. The research question guiding this study was ‘how the incorporation of the lean startup methodology into the processes of an accelerator influences the dynamics of relationships between entrepreneurs and their assigned coaches’? Here, an ethno- graphic approach is used to examine the lectures, seminars, and coaching sessions that form the backbone of a 15-week accelerator program. In addition, ten interviews with entrepreneurs and six inter- views with coaches were conducted to complement the extensive non- participatoryobservationaldata.Thisstudycontributestotheliterature on accelerators, entrepreneurial coaching, and the lean startup meth- odology in two ways. First, it develops a more in depth understanding of the role of coaches and coaching sessions in terms of both form and content. Second, it traces the instructions of the lean startup metho- dology throughout and beyond the coaching sessions to investigate the influence of the methodology as an organizing framework. 2. Frame of reference Thecurrentresearchsettinginvolvesthreemainspaceswithvarious levels of overlap: the lean startup methodology, entrepreneurial coaching and accelerators. These components will, therefore, be in- troduced here in this order to then qualify the ethnographic study where interrelations between these components will be investigated. 2.1. The lean startup methodology The lean startup methodology by Ries (2011) was inspired by the principles of the lean manufacturing (avoiding waste and optimizing resource spending) and the work of Steve Blank (Blank, 2006). The ideas in the methodology are reminiscent of contributions such as “disciplined entrepreneurship” (Sull, 2004),
methodology are reminiscent of contributions such as “disciplined entrepreneurship” (Sull, 2004), “discovery-driven plan- ning” (McGrath and MacMillan, 2000) and “probe and learn” (Lynn et al., 1996). The methodology benefits from a set of tools taken from other theories and methods, such as the customer development fra- mework (Blank and Dorf, 2012), rapid prototyping of design thinking (Brown, 2008), and agile software development principles (Dybå and Dingsøyr, 2008). Core to the lean startup methodology is validated learning throughpurposeful experimentation,inwhich the effectuation principlesofflexibilityandaffordableloss(ReadandSarasvathy,2005) areapplied(FredriksenandBrem,2017).Theleanstartupmethodology has a unique language, structure and strict advice. Therefore, it can be viewed as a metaphorical boundary object, enabling the wielders of the method to display their expertise (Koskinen, 2005). Validated learning highlights progress through a process of testing a set of carefully for- mulated assumptions and analyzing solid empirical data obtained from real customers (Maurya, 2012; Ries, 2011). The lean startup methodology as a cyclical process is grounded in three main sets of activities. First, entrepreneurs dissect their business ideas into testable assumption and map them onto the business model canvas (Osterwalder et al., 2005) as testable assumptions. This gra- phical respresentation contains all the key aspects that entrepreneurs should be relatively certain about. Second, entrepreneurs engage in a process designed to test the assumptions in realtion to their business ideas (Ries, 2011). The sequence of these tests is determined by the perceivedcriticalityoftheresultsofthetestsforthecontinuationofthe process. One way to test the assumptions is to prepare a “minimum viable product” (MVP). An MVP is a version of the product containing the smallest set of features, built using the minimum amount of time and resources and provides entrepreneurs with the
features, built using the minimum amount of time and resources and provides entrepreneurs with the information re- quired to validate or invalidate their assumptions (Ries, 2011). After a rigorous evaluation of the results, the invalidated assumptions are re- placed by new assumptions and are then re-tested. This processcontinues until a reasonable number of tests validates the critical as-sumptions. Finally, entrepreneurs decide on the remaining assumptions based on their interactions with potential customers. A key concept in theleanstartupmethodologyisthe“product-marketfit.”Thefitimplies that the product idea has a market and, therefore, there are customers willing to pay for the value offered by the product (Blank and Dorf, 2012). The ultimate goal of the process is to guide entrepreneurs in finding this fit. 2.2. Entrepreneurial coaching Coachinghas beendefined in severalways: asallactivities aimedat bringing out the potential of individuals (Hargrove, 2000); all delib- erate intervention activities used to help individuals to develop and achieve their specified goals (Aas and Vavik, 2015); a structured two- way process to developing skills and competencies through “assess- ment, guided practical experience, and regular feedback” (Parsloe, 1999:1); and a set of practices to help individuals to learn (Whitmore, 1992). Coaching is suggested to be instrumental as a support measure (Audet and Couteret, 2012), as a structured framework to steer com- munications and conversations (Spence and Grant, 2007), as a tool to organize peer-learning (Kutzhanova et al., 2009), as a way to create a sense of peer pressure (Van Weele et al., 2015), as a function that createsasenseofbelongingtoalargergroup(Kutzhanovaetal.,2009), and, most importantly, as an aid to encourage action (Cooper et al., 2012; Flaherty, 2005). Inthisstudy,entrepreneurialcoachingisdefinedasthesupportthat entrepreneurs receive in the early stages of their entrepreneurial ac-tivities to help them to develop
receive in the early stages of their entrepreneurial ac-tivities to help them to develop and acquire necessary skills (Audet and Couteret,2012).Thekeytocoaching,ingeneral,andtoentrepreneurial coaching in particular is the notion of learning (Bachkirova et al., 2014).Often,ratherthanresolvingspecificproblems,coachesprovidea contextwithinwhichentrepreneurscandeveloptheskillsandexpertise needed to solve the problems that may arise. Coaching includes all the various ways of helping entrepreneurs in startup accelerator programs, where entrepreneurs lack knowledge, skills, and experience. Therefore, coaches can help entrepreneurs to extract entrepreneur-driven solu- tions. Although sometimes valuable, it is not necessarily the startup background and practical experience of coaches that defines en- trepreneur-coach relationships (Britton, 2010). The productiveness of the relationship between coaches and en- trepreneurs is influenced by factors such as the equality of power be- tween the two sides of the coaching relationship, the extent to which a culture of collaborative learning is promoted, the effectiveness of communication, and the tools and techniques used to facilitate the developmental efforts (Cox et al., 2014; Schein, 1987). In order to promote openness and trust within an entrepreneurial coaching re- lationship, it is advised to avoid a hierarchy between the coach (who can be viewed as the facilitator of learning) and the entrepreneur (O’Broin and Palmer, 2009; Schein, 1987). Moreover, communications can be facilitated effectively through practices such as “listening, clar- ifying, encouraging reflection and criticality, and questioning” (Cox et al., 2014:6), which have been shown to be reliable vehicles for col- laborative learning (Cox, 2013). Therefore, the quality of these re- lationships impacts effective learning by facilitating and speeding up learning episodes. Entrepreneurial coaching relationships can be divided into three archetypes: functionalist,
Entrepreneurial coaching relationships can be divided into three archetypes: functionalist, engagement, and evolutionary. In a function- alistcoaching relationship,thedesiredoutcomeofthecoachingepisodes isincrementalchangestoroutinesandactivities,withnomajorrevision of entrepreneurs’ existing norms and values (Brockbank, 2008). Func- tionalist coaching is directive, didactic, and advice-driven in principle (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). The learning outcome in this style is single-loop learning (Argyris and Schön, 1974). A drawback of this approach is that it views the entrepreneur as “detached, disembodied, and passive” (Brockbank and McGill, 2006:30).Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 38
In anengagement coaching relationship, similar to functionalist coaching, the desired outcome is incremental improvement in routines, while preserving existing norms and values. However, in this case, this happens in a non-directive manner. To minimize resistance from en- trepreneurs, the coach adopts a humanistic and relationship-driven approach (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). This relationship places greater value on learning and change (Brockbank, 2008). The learning outcome in this style is also single-loop learning (Argyris and Schön, 1974) but includes the potential for reflection (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). In contrast to functionalist and engagement coaching, in an evolu- tionary coaching relationship, the desired outcome is transformational development induced by fundamental changes to the established as- sumptions held by entrepreneurs. Similar to an engagement coach, an evolutionary coach adopts a humanistic and relationship-driven ap- proach to learning (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). The learning out- come in this style is double-loop learning (Argyris and Schön, 1974), which promotes the personal and professional development of en- trepreneurs, leading them to improve their existing norms and values (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). Here, the coach helps entrepreneurs to take ownership of their learning and development. The main distin- guishingfeatureofevolutionarycoachingistheplatformitprovidesfor 'reflective dialogue' with entrepreneurs (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). In the context of this study, coaches engage in an evolutionary ap- proach,investingmoretimeinassistingthoughtandreflectionasaway to facilitate learning and development rather than directing en- trepreneurs’ actions. 2.3. Startup accelerators The empirical setting of this study is that of startup accelerators. As a rapidly growing phenomenon, startup accelerators are viewed as a mutation of incubators (Wise and Valliere, 2014), providing more ser- vices than those offered by traditional
incubators (Wise and Valliere, 2014), providing more ser- vices than those offered by traditional incubators to early-stage busi- nesses. In comparison with incubators, accelerators are “fixed-term, cohort-based programs” that include educational and inspirational elements inaddition tocoachingand “culminateina public pitchevent or a demo day” in front of a group of potential investors (Cohen and Hochberg, 2014:4). One of the first accelerators, Y Combinator, was established in the United States in 2005, and has since inspired many others. As part of accelerator programs, entrepreneurs are offered a work space, educational and coaching possibilities, and access to the accelerator’s alumni, network of coaches, and organizers, including venture capitalists, experienced entrepreneurs, and corporate execu- tives (Bruneelet al.,2012). Thesupportive environment of accelerators provides peer learning and peer support, allowing for opportunities for networking and referrals. Being affiliated with an accelerator con- tributes to creating an entrepreneur’s brand and actsas a legitimization tool, helping the entrepreneur to establish contacts and raise necessary funds (Wise and Valliere, 2014). In contrast with incubators, an im- portant value-added service is the role played by coaches. However, despite the growing interest in accelerators from policymakers, private and public investors, universities, and even corporations (Mian et al., 2016), little is known about the role of coaches and their coaching in the context of accelerators. This study relies on data gathered from an accelerator housed by Chalmers Ventures, the incubation and seed-funding subsidiary of Chalmers University of Technology in Sweden. Chalmers is recognized as an entrepreneurial university that emphasizes venture creation (Berggren, 2011; Clarysse and Bruneel, 2007; Jacob et al., 2003; Lundqvist, 2014; Lundqvist and Williams-Middleton, 2008; Ollila and Williams-Middleton, 2011; Wright, 2007). The
Lundqvist and Williams-Middleton, 2008; Ollila and Williams-Middleton, 2011; Wright, 2007). The accelerator program runs for 15 weeks and offers access to its network, coaching, and educational facilities for up to 20 entrepreneurial teams in each cohort. Likemostaccelerators,theaimofthisacceleratorprogramistohelp a business idea or an existing venture to become growth andinvestment-ready (Davila et al., 2010). The accelerator program offersoffice spaces, networking and financing events, dedicated business coaching,andvisitsfromserialentrepreneursandculminatesinademo day. The program bears direct resemblance to the Y Combinator pro- gram in terms of its structure. However, the competition to get into the studied accelerator is lower than Y Combinator, and a consequence is that the ventures in the studied accelerator are younger than those in Y Combinator. Entrepreneurs apply to join the accelerator program while in the earlystagesofthedevelopmentoftheirideasandareputingroupswith assigned coaches. The coaches include successful entrepreneurs, ac- celerator program alumni, venture capitalists, lawyers, angel investors, andcorporateexecutives.Theacceleratorprogramalsooffersanumber of educational lectures covering a wide range of topics in line with the lean startup methodology. The program is structured into three phases, each lasting five weeks. After the second phase, there is a selection process, with almost half of the teams being eliminated. The remaining teams continue through the third phase before pitching their ideas, receivingfeedback,andansweringquestionsposedbyinvestorsandthe public on the final demo day. 3. Data and methods 3.1. Research methods Ithasbeenarguedthatthecombinationofethnography,interviews, andotherdata-collectionmethodscanresultinimportantcontributions as this provides mechanism-based explanations and rich descriptive accounts that cross and connect different levels of analysis (Vaughan, 2009). Ethnography can be understood as “research
connect different levels of analysis (Vaughan, 2009). Ethnography can be understood as “research conducted by si- tuating oneself in a social setting to observe and analyze individual interaction in order to understand some complex social process, event,activity, or outcome” (Vaughan, 2009:690). Ethnographers spend time in their research setting and become immersed in the activities that need attention, including the beginning and ending points. Further- more,theyenterthefieldwithnoclearguidelinesastohowtheprocess might evolve. According to Aldrich and Baker (1997), there is a lack of ethnographical research in the field of entrepreneurship, to which Martinez et al. (2011) concur. This study adopts ethnography as a re- search method to investigate the actions and social interactions in the context of a startup accelerator program. Thus, the empirical evidence is based on ethnographic data, including exploratory non-participant observations,interviews,andsecondarydata,assistingingeneratingan empirically grounded understanding of entrepreneur-coach relation- ships. 3.2. Sample The sample initially consisted of 17 entrepreneurial teams and 41 entrepreneurs. All teams were composed of at least two entrepreneurs and were encouraged to participate in all scheduled activities. The sample included a broad range of participants in terms of age, gender, education, and experience. The accelerator program included three phases. At the end of the second phase, the organizers identified 10 teamstoproceedtothethirdphase.Thus,thesamplewaslimitedtothe remaining teams for further interviews and a closer examination of their processes, although the data gathered through observation up to that point included all 17 teams. This was simply the result of a lack of access to the eliminated teams. During some of the interviews, team members other than the lead entrepreneurs participated, but for sim- plicity, they were treated as a single group in the analysis of the col- lected data. For
for sim- plicity, they were treated as a single group in the analysis of the col- lected data. For instance, statements from entrepreneurs who were part of Startup 1 are presented as S1. Tables 1 and 2 provide additional details about the entrepreneurs and coaches, respectively.Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 39
3.3. Data collection The empirical data for this study were collected through ethno- graphicfieldresearchduringspringandsummerof2016.Thisincluded non-participant observations, in-depth semi-structured interviews, weekly qualitative questionnaires, the cohort’s public Slack channel (a cloud-based team collaboration tool), and field notes collected during the coaching sessions, lectures, and inspirational seminars. During the 15 weeks of the accelerator program, the lead author was physically present at the accelerator and followed nearly all of the activities. All lectures, inspirational seminars, and coaching sessions were recorded. During the weekly coaching sessions, the lead author attended one of the sessions and recorded the other two. Interviews with the lead en- trepreneurs of the 10 teams who proceeded to the third phase, as well as with the six coaches involved in the accelerator program were con- ducted. The interviews lasted 80min each, on average, and were re- corded and transcribed verbatim. Three sets of qualitative ques- tionnaires were sent on a weekly basis: one at the beginning of the week, one after the coaching sessions, and one after the lectures and inspirational seminars. The entrepreneurs were asked about the activ- ities they had undertaken, their learning, and their plans for the up- comingweek.Allthepublicinteractionsbetweentheentrepreneursand their coaches as well as other entrepreneurs, which were documented on the program’s Slack channel were closely monitored and coded. Table 3demonstrates the data sources. 3.4. Data analysis The data were analyzed inductively using grounded methodology principles, following natural language coding and categorization (Miles and Huberman, 1984). All empirical data were imported into a quali- tative data analysis application (Atlas.ti) and open-coded at the level of smallest meaning units (Strauss and Corbin, 1998). The codes include a wide range of topics, such as inclusion of the lean startup
and Corbin, 1998). The codes include a wide range of topics, such as inclusion of the lean startup methodology as part of the accelerator program, coaches and their positions of au- thority, the role of coaching sessions in creating legitimacy for the coaches, the impact of the coaching sessions on entrepreneurs’ mental development, and the role of the social setting in developing necessary skills.Tolimitthebroadcategorizationprocess,thedatawerearranged using the codes and categories related to the entrepreneur-coach re- lationships. The rationale behind focusing on these codes and cate- gories, and excluding others, follows the purpose of the study, which revolves around an explicit entrepreneurial method, the pronounced role of coaches, and the social aspects of the coaching sessions. For instance, the category “lack of instructions on the level of tools and tactics”wasexcludedbecauseitpertainstothedesignoftheaccelerator programratherthantoentrepreneur-coachrelationships.Thisstructure providedarichandconcisenarrativeofevents. Table4presentsthemes and categories.4. Findings Inlinewith Table4,thefindingssectionisorganizedintothreesub- sections, corresponding to the three larger themes. Therefore, eachtheme is discussed by providing quotes from the entrepreneurs and coaches for the identified categories. The findings section focuses pri- marily on the impact of incorporating and applying the lean startup methodology on entrepreneur-coach relationships along the three themes of coaching form, coaching content, and coaching context. 4.1. Coaching form The first theme refers broadly to the elements of the accelerator program that impact the structure of coaching sessions. It provides texture to the dynamics of the entrepreneur-coach relationships and offersinsightsintotheroleplayedbytheinstructionsoftheleanstartup methodology. The entrepreneurs and their coaches interacted through individual and group coaching sessions, as well as during educational lectures. A large
through individual and group coaching sessions, as well as during educational lectures. A large number of these interactions were influenced by the ideas and the instructions of the lean startup methodology. The teamof coaches decided to follow a common structure during the coaching sessions. They explicitly asked entrepreneurs to prepare status updates describingtheircontactswithpeopleoutsidetheirteams,pastactivities relatedtovalidatingtheirhypotheses,andplansforupcomingactivities as well as the insights they gathered from those activities (to provide a space for peer learning). This agenda helped to structure the interac- tions between coaches and entrepreneurs in ways that made en- trepreneurs aware of the activities expected of them and, therefore, facilitated their progress in line with the expectations of the coaches. According to the coaches, this agenda was designed to “provide di- rectionandconfidence”[C1,C3,C4],“helptodevelopnewwaysofthinking and necessary skills” [C1, C5], “induce peer pressure and increase en- gagement” [C1, C6], “encourage sharing experiences and helping each other” [C5, C6], and “cultivate a sense of belonging” [C2, C5, C6]. One of the coaches explained the process of setting the agenda as follows: “We satdownanddiscussedafewheadlinesandthenwedugintothose.Icansay that we finally landed on following the lean startup methodology in every- thingwedid”[C1].Moreover,allcoachesclaimedthattheyfollowedthe principles and instructions of the lean startup methodology explicitly when organizing their coaching sessions and their individual relation- shipswiththeteamstheycoached.Considerthefollowingstatement:“I think that the lean startup methodology and all the tools such as business model canvas give the entrepreneurs and us coaches ways to structure in- formation and find gaps in our knowledge to be able to treat some of the uncertainties and make sense of various situations” [C5]. The inclusion of the lean startup methodology also impacted how
sense of various situations” [C5]. The inclusion of the lean startup methodology also impacted how coaches were viewed by the entrepreneurs during the coaching ses-sions. The structure signalled legitimacy of coaches' experience and facilitated trust between them and the entrepreneurs. The explicit ad- herence to the instructions of the lean startup methodology eventually had a positive influence on the entrepreneur-coach relationships andTable 1 Entrepreneurs and their teams. Idea Prototype before the program Prior knowledge of LSMaMajor changes Finished prototype (S1) Online diagnosis of urinary tract infection No None No Yes (S2) Property registration platform No None No Not completed (S3) Market research platform Yes Limited familiarity Yes Yes (S4) Matchmaking tool for the sublet market No Previous courses Yes Not completed (S5) Digital recruitment service No Limited familiarity Yes Not completed (S6) Sleep optimization app No None No Yes (S7) Online ecological shop No Limited familiarity Yes Yes (S8) Gardeners logging app Yes Limited familiarity No Yes (S9) Smart textile for road workers No None Yes Yes (S10) App for diabetes No None Yes Not completed aThe lean startup methodology.Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 40
created a sense that the coaches possessed the relevant expertise: “I listen to my coach because his knowledge is the sum of years of reading, interactions and solid experiences. I would listen to someone who is an ex- pert in the lean startup processes rather than one who just expresses opi- nions” [S7]. This legitimacy was used directly to resolve internal con- flicts in the teams by referencing the instructions received from the coaches that followed those of the lean startup methodology: “If I said somethingandmyteammembersdisagreedandthenIconfrontedthemwith whatourcoachhadsaid,theyagreedwithmypointaloteasierbecausethey valued our coach’s expertise especially regarding the lean startup metho- dology” [S5]. Moreover, several factors led to the coaches being viewed as figures ofauthority.Placingdemandsontheentrepreneursinlinewiththelean startup methodology, requiring that they structure their activities around them, and the filtering process after the second phase were important factors in the conditioning of the entrepreneur-coach re- lationships.Oneoftheentrepreneursofferedthefollowingstatementin response to a hypothetical question: “If I talk to a bunch of people and then they tell me that an aspect of my idea does not make any sense, and then I consult my coach and he advises me to the contrary, I listen to my coach” [S3]. One of the coaches expressed concern about the un- reasonable trust and authority that this created: “Ifthe coachsaysgoleft and the customer says go right, then the entrepreneurs go left. It is because they have unsound expectations of their coach. Unfortunately, the en- trepreneurshaveabittoomuchrespectforourauthority”[C1]. Inaddition to providing a structure and direction for the coaching sessions and entrepreneur-coach relationships, the instructions of the methodology influenced the thinking and actions of the entrepreneurs. 4.2. Coaching content The second theme refers broadly to the implicit and explicit effects of the lean startup
content The second theme refers broadly to the implicit and explicit effects of the lean startup methodology as the organizing framework on the knowledge content throughout the coaching sessions. Participating in coaching sessions and being exposed to the instructions of the lean startup methodologyledtoa numberofsalientchangesintheactivities undertaken by the entrepreneurs. As part of the coaching sessions, entrepreneurs were asked to map their assumptions about their busi- ness ideas to the business model canvas: “Early in the process, we were supposed to map our critical hypotheses about our target customers, docu- ment them on the [business model] canvas and immediately start talking to themtofigureoutwhetherornottheproblemweaimtosolveactuallyexists outside of our heads” [S4]. Moreover, the coaches explicitly required that entrepreneurs contact potential customers and collect feedback on their ideas: “Our coaches made us goout and talk to as many customers as possible, and report the insights gained through those interactions during coachingsessions.Asitbecamecompetitivebetweentheteams,wepushedallour team members to talk to an even larger number of people” [S1]. The newly introduced activities in the coaching sessions led to new routines and processes: “Every single step we now take is based on the knowledgewe have gathered fromvalidatedsources, mainlyfrom customers and users. Now, every decision we make is based on validated assumptions” [S5]. These new routines eventually translated into new ways ofviewing the venture-creation process. That is, the entrepreneurs’mindset related to reasonable and rational ways to proceed was mod- ified: “Having participated in the coaching sessions and through interacting with our coaches, I think it is fair to believe that when one has an idea, one needs to bounce it back and forth with others in general and customers in particular and consider the feedback one gets after thorough evaluation” [S9]. As a result of the lean
and consider the feedback one gets after thorough evaluation” [S9]. As a result of the lean startup methodology, coaching sessions also created an environment in which entrepreneurs gained self-confidence and self-efficacy. This was facilitated by coaching sessions that pro- videdaforuminwhichentrepreneurscoulddiscusstheirachievements, share their experiences, receive recognition and help other en- trepreneurs, and perceive a level of expertise. Despite failing to fully execute his idea and create the firstprototype, one ofthe entrepreneurs expressed more confidence in pursuing new ideas: “I hope we would continue with our idea but if we do not succeed with it, I feel much more comfortable pursuing a new idea or starting a new company in the future becauseinteractingwithourcoachesgaveusthisexperienceandhelpedusto collect necessary knowledge in relation to starting a new business” [S6]. Another entrepreneur claimed that he now has a clear process for starting a new business: “By completing this accelerator program and participating in the coaching sessions, I believe it is more accessible for us to pursue another idea because I have the experience. Our participation in the coaching sessions and learning from our coaches make me believe that we have a much better overview of the entrepreneurial process” [S2]. In addition to higher self-confidence, entrepreneurs generally ex- pressed higher self-efficacy. Having access to new ways of doing things was instrumental in their perceived self-efficacy. They reported that beinginstructedbythecoachesabouttheleanstartupmethodologyhas helped to improve their chances of success, both during and after the acceleratorprogram:“Iamalreadyresearchinganumberofdifferentideas at the moment.I definitely feelnow thatI have ahigher chance ofbecoming successful at starting my business than if I have not learned about the [the lean startup] methodology” [S8]. In addition to providing content and form, the inclusion of the lean startup
methodology” [S8]. In addition to providing content and form, the inclusion of the lean startup methodology, coupled with the social nature of the coaching sessions, proved to be influential in terms of knowledge accumulation, motivation, and confidence. 4.3. Coaching context The third theme refers broadly to the role played by the context of the coaching sessions in combination with the instructions of the lean startup methodology. This theme focuses on the interactions within the coaching sessions, both between the entrepreneurs and the coaches, and among the entrepreneurs. One of the entrepreneurs described his experience of receiving feedback from his coach as moments that pro- vided himwith newperspectivesthat he had previouslyneglected:“Weattended the coaching sessions each week with the perception that we had confirmed or disconfirmed some of the assumptions about our idea. During these sessions, coaches gave us new angles of perception by arguing in line with the [the lean startup] methodology, even though we thought we had confirmed some aspects of our idea. In many cases, this led us to different directions altogether” [S10]. One of the coaches noted that an importantTable 2 Coaches and their experiences. Experience at the acceleratorCoachtrainingKnowledge about the lean startup methodology Coaching experience Startupscoached (C1) Four years No Trips to California, books, online resources Business plan competitions, Chalmersventures, Chalmers InnovationS1,S2,S4,S5 (C2) Two years No Books and online resources Chalmers Ventures S1,S2,S4,S5 (C3) Four years No Trips to California, books, online resources BornGlobal, Chalmers Innovation S3, S7, S8 (C4) 15 years No Books, online resources, lectures by proponents of the lean startup methodology Chalmers Ventures, Chalmers Innovation S3, S7, S8 (C5) 16 years Yes Books, online resources, lectures by proponents of the lean startup methodology Chalmers Ventures, Chalmers Innovation S6, S9, S10 (C6)One-and-a-half
the lean startup methodology Chalmers Ventures, Chalmers Innovation S6, S9, S10 (C6)One-and-a-half years No Books, online resources, course at Palo Alto Chalmers Ventures S6, S9, S10Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 41
aspect of the coaching sessions was to make the entrepreneurs follow the lean startup methodology, report back on the insights they had gained through customer interactions and capitalize on the social nature of the coaching sessions. The intention was to encourage further interactionsandlearningpossibilitiesduringthecoachingsessions.One of the coaches expressed this as follows: “The point is that we wanted them to get out of the building and conduct interviews, to start interacting with their customers and report them back. We explicitly asked them for solid evidence and the implications of the evidence collected through those interactions”[C3].Ingeneral,thecoachesencouragedtheentrepreneurs to “raise the bar” [C2, C5, C6] by increasing the number of interactions in subsequent weeks. The coaches used the lean startup methodology to add richness to the social interactions of the coaching sessions. They encouraged en- trepreneurstoseethemselvesinthecoachinggroupsasmembersof“the collective brain” [C5] and, therefore, find ways to help their fellow en- trepreneurs by being supportive at all times. Many of the interactions among entrepreneurs were influenced by the instructions of the lean startup methodology. As a result, entrepreneurs shared their experi- ences and received feedback from other entrepreneurs: “We spend a lot of time with each other working out a map of where we should be going, what we should be doing, and planning activities while giving each other feedback. We gave advice or got inspiration. For instance, we got interesting feedback on the experiments we had designed to validate some of ourhypotheses” [S9]. One of the coaches described the dynamics of the coaching sessions as follows: “When entrepreneurs talked about a parti- cular topic, they knew that others may have gone through the same process before.So,theywantedtoknowwhatandhowothershavemanagedvarious issuesandwhattheirlearningwas”[C2].Anothercoachcharacterizedthe coaching sessions as learning
issuesandwhattheirlearningwas”[C2].Anothercoachcharacterizedthe coaching sessions as learning and developmental episodes, leading to entrepreneursbondoverknowledgeand,thus,benefitfromeachother’s expertise: “The relationships can get more solidified. When two en- trepreneurs with quite different opinions on something discussed during the coaching sessions, they triggered something in each other. The group nature of the coaching sessions allowed for this to happen. I think the bonding over the knowledge and the ensuing friendships between the entrepreneurs were important outcomes of using the lean startup methodology in the coaching sessions” [C1]. In addition, the nature of these coaching sessions provided a ple- thora of possibilities for peer learning and peer pressure. The coaches consciously created a competitive setting, which contributed to the formation of these possibilities. On several occasions, entrepreneurs discussed learning events that had resulted from second-hand experi- ences during the coaching sessions. By virtue of being present at the coaching sessions, entrepreneurs succeeded in accumulating relevant knowledge in line with the lean startup methodology that proved helpfultotheirprocesses.Considerthefollowingstatementfromoneof the entrepreneurs during an informal chat with the lead author: “ITable 3 Empirical data. Data type Sources of data Details Interviews Six coaches 8h 12 entrepreneurs 11h Observations 12 group coaching sessions 12.6h Seven lectures and six seminars 20h Discussions between coaches during pre-program selection meeting 2h Discussions between coaches during mid-program selection meeting 3h 17 elevator pitches during demo day at the end of phase 2 4h 10 15-min pitches during final demo day 3h Presentations PowerPoint slides 27 slide decks Messages and discussions Slack channel communications 40 pages Qualitative questionnaires Three sets of weekly online questionnaires 471 data points Researcher’s notes Non-participant
Three sets of weekly online questionnaires 471 data points Researcher’s notes Non-participant observations in the program 65 pages Recordings 27 group coaching sessions 20h Table 4The emerging themes and categories. Themes Categories Example codes Coaching form •The lean startup methodology and the entrepreneur-coach dynamics•Coaches and the position of authority•Coaches and their legitimacy•Coaching sessions and revised structure•Coaching sessions and facilitation of trust formation•The coaches’ expectations from the entrepreneurs in line with the methodology•Valuing coaches’ opinions higher than external sources of data•Coaches’ knowledge about the methodology creating credibility•Commitment to the lean startup methodology as a structuring framework•Building trust facilitated by the demands of the methodology to share progress and problems Coaching content •Coaching sessions and changes in activities undertaken•Coaching sessions and changes in mindset•Coaching and elevated self-confidence•Coaching and elevated self-efficacy•A systematic approach to validating ideas facilitating interactions with coaches•Understanding changes and openness to flexibility•Group coaching as a tool contributing to self-confidence•Changes in perception related to the difficulty of starting a new business Coaching context •Social aspectsof the coaching sessions(interactions with the coaches)•Social aspects of the coaching sessions (interactions with the other entrepreneurs)•Coaching sessions and opportunities for peer learning•Competition and progress•Coaching sessions and peer pressure•Coaches encouraging more discussion and participation•Entrepreneurs sharing contacts and offer help•Entrepreneurs sharing plans on how they validated their hypotheses•Competition as a motivating factor for entrepreneurs to contact customers•Coaching session as a mechanism to pressure entrepreneurs into more actionY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 42
remember several occasions during the coaching sessions that one of the entrepreneurs asked a question or shared a specific experience and the question was exactly what I was pondering about or the insights from the experience were very relevant to my own process” [S10]. The coaches viewed the coaching sessions as arenas in which entrepreneurs could give each other feedback and listen to and learn from each other’s ex- periences: “The main goal behind the coaching sessions was to build an effectiveculturewhereentrepreneurssharedexperiencesandgaveeachother leads” [C6]. Moreover, the coaches placed pressure on the entrepreneurs by exposing them to other entrepreneurs’ achievements. They structured the coaching sessions in a way that the entrepreneurs were required to give status updates, including critical insights gained through their interactions with customers. This helped the coaches to create pressure and provide encouragement and, therefore, get entrepreneurs to raise their ambitions: “We certainly wanted to make it more efficient by having peer pressure among the teams. The idea was to expose them to what other teams have really been up to, talking to people, getting a deeper under- standing, and getting more meaningful contacts with potential customers” [C4]. This resulted in a competitive environment in which some en- trepreneurs tried to surpass others by becoming more proactive and persistentinattractingtheattentionoftheircoaches:“Itwasgoodforthe entrepreneurs to listen and see how other teams were progressing in relation to what they were doing. It became somehow a competitive environment. Whenwegavethematask,theydidnotwanttocomebackandbetheworst guys in the room. They knew that at the end of the day, there was a qua- lification for them to be able to continue in the accelerator program. I think thisresultedinthemperformingbetterbybeinginasocialsetting,listeningto other entrepreneurs and contributing to discussions” [C3]. In general, en- trepreneurs were
other entrepreneurs and contributing to discussions” [C3]. In general, en- trepreneurs were positive about the competitive side of the coaching sessions and associated some of their progress to this specific element: “Thecoachesmadeitintoacompetitionbetweenus.Ithinkthatitwaswhen they pushed the hardest that we progressed the most by fighting the mostduring this experience” [S8]. 4.4. A brief summary of the key findings The findings suggest several ways in which the lean startup meth- odology influenced the entrepreneur-coach relationships. The coaches were tasked with providing direction and confidence and help en- trepreneurs to develop their thinking and gather necessary skills. However, the dynamics of the coaching sessions were more similar to a traditional leader–follower structure. The lean startup methodology enabled coaches to create the sense of trust and competence necessary to establish productive entrepreneur-coach relationships. The coaches’ advice in line with the instructions of the lean startup methodology helped to reduce team conflict by resolving intra-team deadlocks. Interestingly, the entrepreneur-coach relationships were shown to beat odds with the basic theoretical principles of the lean startup metho- dology,namely,thathypothesesshouldbetestedagainstempiricaldata collected through interactions with potential customers, rather than having theory or authority be the key principles guiding action. A particular aspect of the coaching sessions was the opportunities it provided for social and peer learning. This affected the entrepreneur- coach relationships, as well as how the coaching sessions were struc- tured and organized. Lastly, entrepreneurs felt they benefited from the competitive environment. 5. Discussion This study explores the relationships between entrepreneurs and their coaches within the context of an accelerator, guided and struc- tured explicitly by the instructions of the lean startup methodology. Employinganethnographicresearch
explicitly by the instructions of the lean startup methodology. Employinganethnographicresearch design,thisstudyoffersimportant insight into the coaching practices and how the inclusion of the lean startup methodology helps to influence and shape coaching practices.The discussion section is divided into four sub-sections: the structure ofthe coaching sessions, the dynamics governing the entrepreneur-coach relationships, the paradox of data in relation to authority, and the vi- carious learning that occurs during these coaching sessions. 5.1. The structure of coaching sessions The experience of entering an accelerator program and facing si- milar challenges has been found to cultivate strong ties and create a common identity among entrepreneurs (Bruneel et al., 2012). Previous studies have shown that participating in lectures and inspirational seminars relevant to problems faced by entrepreneurs contributes to an increased knowledge base among the participants (Davidsson and Honig, 2003). In the current case, coaches organized the coaching sessions following the lean startup methodology to encourage en- trepreneurs to act and to allow for their transparent evaluation. This included encouraging entrepreneurs to share detailed accounts of their activities specific to the lean startup methodology in order to build bonds among them. The setup of the studied accelerator program culminated in the announcement of a winning team that was offered investment and created a competitive environment. Therefore, there was both a com- munal feeling among entrepreneurs where collaborating and co- operating was the norm as well as a sense of competition and rivalry (Bøllingtoft, 2012). The adoption of the lean startup methodology fos- teredbotheffects.Onthe onehand,itledto entrepreneurscarryingout activities to attract the attention of their coaches. On the other hand, entrepreneurs used coaching sessions based on the lean startup meth-
coaches. On the other hand, entrepreneurs used coaching sessions based on the lean startup meth- odologyasopportunitiestocollectivelymakesenseofthemethodology. Entrepreneurs attempted to understand the instructions of the metho- dology through repeated discussion and reflection, both with coaches and other entrepreneurs. This can be interpreted as a process of knowledgeinternalization(Nonaka etal.,1996)aswell astheadoption of certain guiding principles (Argyris and Schön, 1974). 5.2. The dynamics of entrepreneur-coach relationships Effective relationships between coaches and entrepreneurs and among entrepreneurs are conditioned by the process of their initiation: formally, under a pre-established structure as part of an initiative (e.g., an accelerator program), or informally, through personal relationships between coaches and entrepreneurs (Eby and Lockwood, 2005). In the accelerator program, the formation of these relationships was pre- determined by the organizers. That is, entrepreneurs and coaches were paired based on coaches’ interests in the business ideas. The initial dynamics of the relationships were impacted directly by the introduc- tionoftheleanstartupmethodology.Thiswasanaturaloutcomeofthe methodology defining and dictating the structure and content of the coaching sessions. The effectiveness of these entrepreneur-coach relationships is lar- gely dependent on an environment of trust and closeness. Trust has been identified as a precondition for channeling coaches’ expertise to supportentrepreneurs’learninginasystematicway(Rymer,2002).The methodology directs coaches’ conversations in the coaching sessions and aligns their expectations with the perceived expectations of en- trepreneurs. This provides a common starting point for discussions, highlights coaches’ skills in relation to the lean startup methodology and leads to a sense of mutual trust (Audet and Couteret, 2012). By posing questions that allow entrepreneurs to openly discuss their pro- gress,
Couteret, 2012). By posing questions that allow entrepreneurs to openly discuss their pro- gress, be proud of their progress, and ask for help in domains where they lack experience and expertise, coaches can create trust without seeming incompetent. Trust helps to form the pretext to learning from the coaching ses- sions,namely,acknowledgingalackofexperienceandexpertiserelated to specific tasks and the skills necessary to perform the expected ac- tivities. This signals the need for learning and acquiring newY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 43
knowledge, creating closer relationships between entrepreneurs and their coaches (Kutzhanova et al., 2009). It also encourages honest in- teractions with the coaches. Entrepreneurs’ initial and continued com- mitment to fruitful relationships with their coaches and their will- ingness to change their behavior and actions are critical to the quality of interactions (Audet and Couteret, 2012; Peterson and Millier, 2005). Sustained trust between entrepreneurs and their coaches increases the likelihood of adopting the structures put in place by the coaches. Previous studies note that coaches should adopt the role of pro- vidingthenecessarystructureforentrepreneurs(Raginsetal.,2016).In the case of the studied accelerator program, the coaches employed the structure of the lean startup methodology, offering shared mental models and additional points of departure. The methodology facilitates interactions and conversations between entrepreneurs and their coa- ches. By coupling this with inspirational seminars, coaches created le- gitimacy for the lean startup methodology as the structuring frame- work. Inherent in its logic, the methodology encourages flexibility and openness to change, resulting in a space where entrepreneurs are more likely to change their behavior, attitude, knowledge base, and to adopt new tools. The current approach resembles an evolutionary coaching strategy aimed at transforming and developing entrepreneurs by in- ducing fundamental changes to their established assumptions (BrockbankandMcGill,2006).Thiscontrastswithbusinessplan-driven coaching, which tends to be more functional in style. It has been suggested that coaches’ expertise has a direct impact on the outcomes of their coachingactivities (Spence and Grant,2007; Sue- Chan and Latham, 2004). Coaches' advocating for the lean startup methodology contributes to their perceived experience and expertise. Entrepreneurs’ perceptions of coaches’ expertise are important to the coaches’ legitimacy.
Entrepreneurs’ perceptions of coaches’ expertise are important to the coaches’ legitimacy. However, other characteristics of coaches, such as their familiarity with the subject area and previous experience in coaching, too, influence their legitimacy and the entrepreneur-coach relationships. Hence, the lean startup methodology coupled with thecoaches’expertiseinfluenceentrepreneur-coachrelationshipsinspiteof our results showing that expertise is valued more highly than the methodology. 5.3. Paradox of data versus authority An interesting and important finding relates to the role of authority during the coaching sessions and in the entrepreneur-coach relation- ships. Contrary to the ideas of the lean startup methodology, the coa- cheswerenotperceivedasneutralfacilitators,guidingentrepreneursin following the instructions. Owing to the design of the accelerator pro- gram—having three phases and oneround of qualificationat the endof the second phase—the coaches were not seen as facilitators of skill development,butratherasauthorityfigureswhoseopinionswereoften valued more highly than the data. This is in stark contrast to the foundation of the lean startup methodology that the data collected through interactions with potential customers have primacy over prior or outdated knowledge and experience (Blank and Dorf, 2012; Ries, 2011).Coaches’expertiseintermsofbusinessdevelopmentshouldonly matter as a way to create a sense of legitimacy. This leads to a para- doxical situation: coaching may be detrimental to the adoption and execution of the lean startup methodology. To overcome this paradox, coaches would benefit from being aware of their style of advising and how they seek to transform entrepreneurs and should be less concerned about their legitimacy and instructive capabilities. Here, they can instead focus on encouraging team mem- bers to speak to one another and engage in learning (Harms, 2015). At the same time, coaches should generate a base-level legitimacy to be
in learning (Harms, 2015). At the same time, coaches should generate a base-level legitimacy to be able to inspire action and elicit trust from entrepreneurs and to con- vince them to adhere to the lean startup methodology. This highlights the importance of early and clear communication by coaches as facil- itators of skill development in the lean startup methodology and of a processofconsultation(Schein,1987).Thismayrequireacleardivisionof labor between those involved in selecting the teams and those actingas coaches. Note that the structure of the accelerator program provides an environment that elevates the importance of coaches as authority figures, thus undermining the validity and significance of the empirical evidence collected by entrepreneurs. 5.4. Vicarious learning as part of the coaching sessions The structure of the coaching sessions created a space for vicarious learning. Because peer learning is an important goal and outcome of coaching sessions, entrepreneurs are enabled to bypass experience by listeningtoother’sexperiences.Inthisway,entrepreneurscandecrease the economic and psychological cost of trial and error while benefiting from second-hand experiences. Vicarious learning, represented by lis- tening and reflective thinking (Nehls, 1995), is largely conditioned by the values individuals associate with the outcome of the modeled ex- periences(GioiaandManz,1985).Someofthemodeledbehaviorswere communicated to them by coaches and others by entrepreneurs. As a faster method than direct experience, these learning episodes create a larger knowledge base among entrepreneurs and affect their inter- personalrelationshipswithotherentrepreneurs.Theintroductionofthe lean startup methodology and its influence on the structure of the coaching sessions had a direct impact on the progression of vicarious learning episodes. A factor that fosters vicarious learning is the acknowledgement that others can provide insights from their own experiences that are per-
is the acknowledgement that others can provide insights from their own experiences that are per- ceived asapplicabletoindividuals'owncases(Ellisetal.,2004).This is linked directly to the notions of legitimacy and authority and how they are signaled successfully early on or are acquired in a relationship (Cleggetal.,2007).Thesenotionsbecomeespeciallyrelevantwhenthe ideas communicated from a position of authority and legitimacy are treated as truth and, therefore, not subject to scrutiny and interpreta- tion (Harden, 2000). This suggests that building trust and legitimacy rather than authority is important to facilitating vicarious learning in these settings. In other words, there is value in giving prominence to and encouraging interactions between entrepreneurs to cultivate such learning. In line with the vicarious learning taking place as part of the coaching sessions, inspirational seminars can play an important role because they function as legitimizers of the lean startup methodology. In the studied accelerator, most of the speakers explicitly endorsed the lean startup methodology and were viewed by the entrepreneurs as legitimate figures who were well-versed in terms of the methodology’s core ideas. This created a space that helped entrepreneurs to learn vi- cariously from these speakers, whose success they associated with the methodology, encouraging them to act in accordance with the metho- dology’s instructions. 5.5. Implications for theory The lean startup methodology has gained broad acceptance in the startup community in a relatively short period (Fredriksen and Brem, 2017). However, there is a lack of evidence on the effectiveness of the methodology. There is also little knowledge about the role of en- trepreneurial coaching in accelerators driven by the lean startup methodology. The main implications for theory from this study are around the lean startup methodology used in accelerators, namely: 1) its behavior-changing effects, 2) its trust-building
methodology used in accelerators, namely: 1) its behavior-changing effects, 2) its trust-building qualities, 3) its lim- itations, and 4) its potential to open a new conversation into the pragmatic role of entrepreneurial methods in entrepreneurial coaching practices. First, lean startup methodology used by coaches in an accelerator has notable effects both on entrepreneur-coach relationships and on vicarious learning among entrepreneurs. The transformative effects captured in the current study do not stem only from coaching or ac- celerator context alone but also from the introduction of the leanY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 44
startup methodology bycoaches asanorganizing framework.This is an effect beyond entrepreneurs cultivating strong ties and creating common identity, previously identified in accelerator programs (Bruneel et al., 2012). The lean startup methodology helps to structure entrepreneur-coach interactions, as well as, provides an environment with plenty of opportunities for vicarious learning among en- trepreneurs. Second, trust is a precondition for entrepreneurs to learn in a sys- tematicwayaspreviouslyfound(Rymer,2002).Moreover,Howtrustis built matters greatly. Trust instilled through the lean startup metho- dology as an organizing framework differs from the traditional way coaches have gained trust by using authority, previous success, and personal experiences and position. The latter arguably results in a functional business planning focused coaching style, whereas the lean startup methodology in the current study enabled an evolutionary coaching style transforming and developing entrepreneurs by inducing fundamental changes to their established assumptions (Argyris and Schön, 1974). Paying attention to microlevel interactions between accelerator coaches, their practices and entrepreneurs, thus, provides additional richness to our understanding of the relationship between the accel- erator environment and entrepreneurial performance (Soetanto and Jack, 2016; Van Weele et al., 2017). Our study suggests that the in- troduction of the lean start up methodology in accelerators changes the authority of coaches, possibly rendering them less assertive. While this enabled a more evolutionary coaching style, it also indicates that coaching theory in the context of accelerators need to deal with the dilemma between authority, expertise and assertiveness, on the one hand, and method-orientation on the other hand. Third,thereareanumberofcaveatsinrelationtothecontextofuse for the lean startup methodology. All the entrepreneurs examined here were working on ideas where interaction
startup methodology. All the entrepreneurs examined here were working on ideas where interaction with customers was key. This is in line with the lean startup methodology holding the customer as amain authority. However, ventures with lower levels of technological readiness (e.g., bioengineering or material sciences) might benefit from other methods than the likes of the lean startup methodology (Harms etal.,2015).Also,coachesinmorespecializedacceleratorscouldtakea larger role in offering networks for the benefit of their clients, as sug- gested by Baraldi and Ingemansson-Havenvid (2016) within medical sciences, rather than asking entrepreneurs to take on all such networkbuilding activities. Nevertheless, prescriptive entrepreneurial methods (Mansoori, 2018) such as the lean startup methodology, can play an important role in changing the relationship between the entrepreneurs and their coaches from functionalist and engagement to evolutionary. And fourth, entrepreneurial methods can be seen as vehicles for making coaches into agents of behavioral modifications rather than the de facto bearers of context dependent knowledge (Grant, 2006). As- sumption-changing behavior of entrepreneurs by coaches has pre- viously not been anticipated in research nor in the lean startup meth- odology itself. Research on entrepreneurial coaching, accelerators, and the broader entrepreneurship would benefit from more investigation of applied entrepreneurial methods. It should also strive to improve en- trepreneurial methods and devise novel ones that not only can illumi- nate the path for entrepreneurs but also help enrich the entrepreneur- coach relationships and by proxy benefit startup accelerators. Hence, this study opens a new conversation into the pragmatic role of entrepreneurial methods in understanding the dynamics of en- trepreneurial coaching. Entrepreneurial methods can be seen not only as tools to organize entrepreneurial activities but also as boundary objects (Koskinen,
not only as tools to organize entrepreneurial activities but also as boundary objects (Koskinen, 2005) facilitating the transition of coaches from authoritarian know-it-alls to enablers of behavioral changes in en- trepreneurs (Parsloe and Leedham, 2009). That is, entrepreneurial methodscanactasvehiclesofchangeinentrepreneurialbehavior,from traditional planning approaches to more experimental and experiential styles. This brings to the forefront the need for more thorough in- vestigation of the role of entrepreneurial methods on entrepreneurialoutcomes (Mansoori, 2018). A question that remains is whether the leanstartupmethodologycanactinsimilarwaysinthedailypracticeof entrepreneurs as in formalized and cohort-based context of accel- erators. 5.6. Implications for practice This study highlights the importance of the role of coaches and the challenges in the design of accelerator programs based on the lean startup methodology. When structuring activities, accelerators have traditionally focusedon a combinationof theories on businessplanning and on the experience of coaches. Coaches’ experience is an important factor in entrepreneur-coachrelationships becausethey are regarded as experts and their experience is considered as instruction for further action. However, including the lean startup methodology introduces challenges into the design of such programs and the role played by coaches. Therefore, it may be necessary to reconsider the role of coa- ches in these programs. Coaches need to consider a process of con- sultationthatisempoweredbyavoidingthepitfallsofexercisingexpert authority (Schein, 1987). A possible way forward may be to regard coaches more as facil- itators of knowledge accumulation and skill development than au- thority figures with extensive experience. Coaches should then limit their authoritative advice to suggestions and options (Hytti and O’Gorman, 2004) and allow entrepreneurs to drive their processes. Therefore, they should aim to formulate
2004) and allow entrepreneurs to drive their processes. Therefore, they should aim to formulate their advice and opinions as hypotheses subject to validation rather than as facts based on past ex- periences. Moreover, there may be benefits in dividing the functions of coaches and organizers. In the studied accelerator program, the fact that the coaches were also the organizers led to some entrepreneurs valuing their coaches’ experience more highly than the data they col- lected from potential customers. This contradicts the basics of the lean startup methodology and creates confusion for entrepreneurs. Thus, there is a need to rethink the design of accelerator programs to provide a space that negates cognitive biases such as anchoring and confirma- tion biases (Kahneman, 2011). 6. Conclusion This study examines the dynamics of entrepreneur-coach relation- ships in a university-based accelerator in Sweden based on the lean startup methodology. The main result is that entrepreneur-coach re- lationshipsaredirectlyimpactedbythe introductionoftheleanstartup methodology because the methodology defines and dictates the struc- tureandcontentofthecoachingsessionsand,thus,providesacommon starting point for discussions. The methodology instills trust, en- courages honest interactions with coaches, and increases participants’ willingness to change their behavior. Thus, it contributes to an evolu- tionary coaching strategy aimed at transforming and developing en- trepreneurs. This finding contrasts with business plan-driven coaching, which tends to be more functional in style. Contrary to the ideas of the lean startup methodology, the coaches were not perceived as neutral facilitators, guiding entrepreneurs in following the methodology. Rather, they were seen as authority figures whose opinions were often valued more highly than the data. The structure of the coaching ses- sionscreatedaspaceforvicariouslearningepisodes.Asafastermethod than direct experience, these episodes
than direct experience, these episodes contribute to a larger knowledge base amongentrepreneurs andimpact theirinterpersonal relationships. Future research should investigate how the coaching style and or- ganization of accelerators affect the paradox of coaches being too au- thoritative in relation to entrepreneurs, potentially hampering the en- trepreneurs’ hypothesis-generation and testing efforts. In addition, the legitimacyofthemethodologymightbechallengedbythenatureofthe venturesbeingaccelerated.Futureresearchshouldinvestigatehowwell the methodology suits ventures that have lower technology readiness levels and other characteristics that affect the heterogeneity of theY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 45
accelerator program. Furthermore, focusing on the relationship be- tween novices and seniority in coaching when using the methodology could be a promising avenue for future research. Finally, this study focused on entrepreneur-coach relationships while indicating the im- portance of team learning and other forms of peer learning within an accelerator. Future research should consider how such vicarious and experiential learning are affected by the lean startup methodology and other entrepreneurial methods. References Aas,M.,Vavik,M.,2015.Groupcoaching:anewwayofconstructingleadershipidentity? Sch. Leadersh. Manag. 35, 251–265. Adomdza,G.,2014.Choosingbetweenastudent-runandprofessionallymanagedventure accelerator. Entrep. Theory Pract. 40, 943–956. Aldrich, H., Baker, T., 1997. Blinded by the cites? Has there been progress in en- trepreneurship research? In: Sexton, D., Smilor, R. (Eds.), Entrepreneurship 2000. Upstart Publishing Company, Chicago, IL, pp. 377–400. Argyris, C., Schön, D.A., 1974. Theory in Practice: Increasing Professional Effectiveness. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA. Audet, J., Couteret, P., 2012. Coaching the entrepreneur: features and success factors. J. Small Bus. Enterp. Dev. 19, 515–531. Bachkirova, T., Cox, E., Clutterbuck, D., 2014. Introduction. In: Cox, E., Bachkirova, T., Clutterbuck,D.(Eds.),TheCompleteHandbookofCoaching.Sage,London,pp.1–20. Baraldi, E., Ingemansson-Havenvid, M., 2016. Identifying new dimensions of business incubation: a multi-level analysis of Karolinska Institute's incubation system. Technovation 50, 53–68. Berggren, E., 2011. The entrepreneurial university’s influence on commercialization of academic research–the illustrative case of Chalmers University of Technology. Int. J. Entrep. Small Bus. 12, 429–444. Blank, S., 2006. The Four Steps to the Epiphany. Cafepress, San Francisco, CA.Blank, S., Dorf, B., 2012. The Startup Owner’s Manual: The Step-by-Step Guide for Building a Great Company. K&S Ranch, Incorporated, San
Owner’s Manual: The Step-by-Step Guide for Building a Great Company. K&S Ranch, Incorporated, San Francisco, CA. Bøllingtoft, A., 2012. The bottom-up business incubator: leverage to networking and cooperation practices in a self-generated, entrepreneurial-enabled environment. Technovation 32, 304–315. Britton, J., 2010. Effective Group Coaching: Tried and Tested Tools and Resources for Optimum Coaching results. John Wiley & Sons, Ontario, Canada. Brockbank,A., 2008.Isthecoachingfit forpurpose?Atypologyof coachingandlearning approaches. Coach.: Int. J. Theory, Res. Pract. 1, 132–144. Brockbank, A., McGill, I., 2006. Facilitating Reflective Learning Through Mentoring and Coaching. Kogan Page Publishers, London, United Kingdom. Brown, T., 2008. Design thinking. Harvard Business Review 86, 84–92. Bruneel, J., Ratinho, T., Clarysse, B., Groen, A., 2012. The evolution of business in- cubators: comparing demand and supply of business incubation services across dif- ferent incubator generations. Technovation 32, 110–121. Christiansen, J., 2009. Copying Y Combinator, A Framework for Developing Seed AcceleratorPrograms (MBAdissertation).UniversityofCambridge,UnitedKingdom. Clarysse, B., Bruneel, J., 2007. Nurturing and growing innovative start-ups: the role of policy as integrator. R&D Manag. 37, 139–149. Clegg, S., Rhodes, C., Kornberger, M., 2007. Desperately seeking legitimacy: organiza- tional identity and emerging industries. Organ. Stud. 28, 495–513. Cohen, S., Hochberg, Y., 2014. Accelerating startups: the seed accelerator phenomenon. SSRN Electron. J. 1–16. Cooper,C.,Hamel,S.,Connaughton,S.,2012.Motivationsandobstaclestonetworkingin a university business incubator. J. Technol. Transf. 37, 433–453. Cox, E., 2013. Coaching Understood. SAGE Publications Limited, London, United Kingdom. Cox,E.,Bachkirova,T.,Clutterbuck,D.,2014.Theoreticaltraditionsandcoachinggenres: mapping the territory. Adv. Dev. Hum. Resour. 16, 1–22. Davidsson, P., Honig, B., 2003. The role of social
the territory. Adv. Dev. Hum. Resour. 16, 1–22. Davidsson, P., Honig, B., 2003. The role of social and human capital among nascent entrepreneurs. J. Bus. Ventur. 18, 301–331. Davila, A., Foster, G., Jia, N., 2010. Building sustainable high-growth startup companies: management systems as an accelerator. Calif. Manag. Rev. 52, 79–105. Dybå, T., Dingsøyr, T., 2008. Empirical studies of agile software development: a sys- tematic review. Inform. Softw. Technol. 50, 833–859. Eby, L., Lockwood, A., 2005. Proteges' and mentors' reactions to participating in formal mentoring programs: a qualitative investigation. J. Vocat. Behav. 67, 441–458. Ellis,R.,Calvo,R.,Levy,D.,Tan,K.,2004.Learningthroughdiscussions.High.Educ.Res. Dev. 23, 73–93. Flaherty, J., 2005. Coaching: Evoking Excellence in Others. Butterworth–Heinemann, Oxford, United Kingdom. Fredriksen, D.L., Brem, A., 2017. How do entrepreneurs think they create value? A sci- entific reflection of Eric Ries' lean Startup approach. Int. Entrep. Manag. J. 13, 169–189. Gioia, D., Manz, C., 1985. Linking cognition and behavior: a script processing inter- pretation of vicarious learning. Acad. Manag. Rev. 10, 527–539.Grant, A., 2006. A personal perspective on professional coaching and the development of coaching psychology. Int. Coach. Psychol. Rev. 1, 12–22. Harden,J.,2000.Language,discourseandthechronotope:applyingliterarytheorytothe narratives in health care. J. Adv. Nurs. 31, 506–512. Hargrove, R., 2000. Masterful Coaching Fieldbook. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA. Harms, R., 2015. Self-regulated learning, team learning and project performance in en- trepreneurship education: learning in a lean startup environment. Technol. Forecast. Social. Change 100, 21–28. Harms, R., Marinakis, Y., Walsh, S.T., 2015. The lean startup for materials ventures and other science-based ventures: under what conditions is it useful? Transl. Mater. Res. 2, 1–8. Hochberg, Y.V., 2015. Accelerating entrepreneurs and ecosystems: the seed
Mater. Res. 2, 1–8. Hochberg, Y.V., 2015. Accelerating entrepreneurs and ecosystems: the seed accelerator. Innov. Policy Econ. 16, 25–51. Hytti, U., O’Gorman, C., 2004. What is “enterprise education”? An analysis of the ob- jectives and methods of enterprise education programs in four European Countries.Educ. + Train. 46, 11–23. Jacob, M., Lundqvist, M., Hellsmark, H., 2003. Entrepreneurial transformations in the Swedish university system: the case of Chalmers University of Technology. Res. Policy 32, 1555–1568. Kahneman, D., 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Macmillan, New York, NY. Koskinen, K.U., 2005. Metaphoric boundary objects as coordinating mechanisms in the knowledge sharing of innovation processes. Eur. J. Innov. Manag. 8, 323–335. Kutzhanova, N., Lyons, T.S., Lichtenstein, G.A., 2009. Skill-based development of en- trepreneurs and the role of personal and peer group coaching in enterprise devel-opment. Econ. Dev. Q. 23, 193–210. Ladd,T.,Lyytinen,K.,Gemmell,R.,2015.Howcustomerinteractionandexperimentation advance new venture concepts in a cleantech accelerator. Acad. Manag. Proc. 1–37. Lundqvist, M., 2014. The importance of surrogate entrepreneurship for incubated Swedish technology ventures. Technovation 34, 93–100. Lundqvist, M., Williams-Middleton, K., 2008. Sustainable wealth creation beyond shareholder value. In: Wankel, C., Stoner, J. (Eds.), Innovative Approaches to GlobalSustainability. Palgrave MacMillan, New York, NY, pp. 39–62. Lynn, G., Morone, G., Paulson, A., 1996. Marketing and Discontinuous Innovation: the probe and learn process. Calif. Manag. Rev. 38, 8–38. Mansoori, Y., 2018. Entrepreneurial Methods as Vehicles of Entrepreneurial Action (Doctoral dissertation). Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden. Martinez, M., Yang, T., Aldrich, H., 2011. Entrepreneurship as an evolutionary process: research progress and challenges. Entrep. Res. J. 1 (Article 4). Maurya, A., 2012. Running Lean: Iterate from Plan A to a Plan that Works.
Res. J. 1 (Article 4). Maurya, A., 2012. Running Lean: Iterate from Plan A to a Plan that Works. O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, CA. McAdam, M., Miller, K., McAdam, R., 2016. Situated regional university incubation: a multi-level stakeholder perspective. Technovation 50, 69–78. McGrath, R., MacMillan, I., 2000. The Entrepreneurial Mindset: strategies for ContinuouslyCreatingOpportunityinanAgeofUncertainty.HarvardBusinessPress,Cambridge, MA. Mian, S., Lamine, W., Fayolle, A., 2016. Technology business incubation: an overview of the state of knowledge. Technovation 50–51, 1–12. Miles, M., Huberman, A., 1984. Drawing valid meaning from qualitative data. Educ. Res. 15, 20–30. Nehls, N., 1995. Narrative pedagogy: rethinking nursing education. J. Nurs. Educ. 34, 204–210. Nonaka, L., Takeuchi, H., Umemoto, K., 1996. A theory of organizational knowledge creation. Int. J. Technol. Manag. 11, 833–845. O’Broin, A., Palmer, S., 2009. Co-creating an optimal coaching alliance: a cognitive be- havioural coaching perspective. Int. Coach. Psychol. Rev. 4, 184–194. Ollila, S., Williams-Middleton, K., 2011. The venture creation approach: integrating en- trepreneurial education and incubation at the university. Int. J. Entrep. Innov. Manag. 13, 161–178. Osterwalder, A.,Pigneur,Y.,Tucci,C.,2005.Clarifyingbusinessmodels:origins,present, and future of the concept. Commun. Assoc. Inform. Syst. 15, 1–38. Parsloe, E., 1999. The Manager as Coach and Mentor, second ed. CIPD Publishing, London, United Kingdom. Parsloe, E., Leedham, M., 2009. Coaching and Mentoring: Practical Conversations to Improve Learning. Kogan Page Publishers, London, UK. Pauwels, C., Clarysse, B., Wright, M., Van Hove, J., 2016. Understanding a new genera- tion incubation model: the accelerator. Technovation 50–51, 13–24. Peterson, D., Millier, J., 2005. The alchemy of coaching: “you’re good, Jennifer, but you could be really good.”. Consult. Psychol. J.: Pract. Res. 57, 14–40. Ragins, B., Cotton, J., Miller, J., 2016.
good.”. Consult. Psychol. J.: Pract. Res. 57, 14–40. Ragins, B., Cotton, J., Miller, J., 2016. Marginal mentoring: the effects of type of mentor, quality of relationship, and program design on work and career attitudes. Acad. Manag. 43, 1177–1194. Read, S., Sarasvathy, S.D., 2005. Knowing what to do and doing what you know: effec- tuation as a form of entrepreneurial expertise. J. Priv. Equity 9, 45–62. Ries, E., 2011. The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation toCreateRadicallySuccessfulBusinesses.RandomHouseDigital,Inc.,NewYork,NY. Rymer, J., 2002. “Only connect”: transforming ourselves and our discipline through co- mentoring. J. Bus. Commun. 39, 342–363. Schein, E., 1987. Process Consultation: Lessons for Managers and Consultants. Addison- Wesley OD Series, Reading, MA. Soetanto, D., Jack, S., 2016. The impact of university-based incubation support on the innovation strategy of academic spin-offs. Technovation 50, 25–40. Spence, G., Grant, A., 2007. Professional and peer life coaching and the enhancement ofY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 46
goal striving and well-being: an exploratory study. J. Posit. Psychol. 2, 185–194. Strauss, A., Corbin, J., 1998. Basics of Qualitative Research: Procedures and Techniques for Developing Grounded Theory. SAGE Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA. Sue-Chan, C., Latham, G., 2004. The relative effectiveness of external, peer, and self- coaches. Appl. Psychol. 53, 260–278. Sull, D., 2004. Disciplined entrepreneurship. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 46, 71–77. Van Weele, M., Van Rijnsoever, F., Eveleens, C., 2015. Start-EU-up! International in- cubation practices to overcome the main challenges of the Western European en- trepreneurial ecosystem, In: DRUID15 Rome – The Relevance of Innovation. VanWeele,M.,vanRijnsoever,F.J.,Nauta,F.,2017.Youcan'talwaysgetwhatyouwant: How entrepreneur's perceived resource needs affect the incubator's assertiveness.Technovation 59, 18–33. Vaughan, D., 2009. Analytic ethnography. In: The Oxford Handbook of Analytical Sociology, pp. 688–711. Whitmore, J., 1992. Coaching for Performance. Nicholas Brealey, London, United Kingdom. Wise,S.,Valliere,D.,2014.Theimpactonmanagementexperienceontheperformanceof start-ups within accelerators. J. Private Equity 9–19. Wright, M., 2007. Academic Entrepreneurship in Europe. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, United Kingdom. York, J.,Danes,J., 2014.Customerdevelopment, innovation,anddecision-makingbiases in lean startup. J. Small Bus. Strategy 24, 21–39.Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 47
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Technovation journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/technovation The influence of the lean startup methodology on entrepreneur-coach relationships in the context of a startup accelerator Yashar Mansoori, Tomas Karlsson, Mats Lundqvist Chalmers University of Technology, Entrepreneurship and Strategy, Vera Sandbergs Allé 8B, 41296 Göteborg, Sweden ARTICLE INFO Keywords: The lean startup methodologyEntrepreneurial coaching Startup accelerator Entrepreneur-coach relationshipVicarious learningABSTRACT Theleanstartupmethodologyhasbeensteadilygainingwidespreadpopularityduringthepastfewyears.Aspart of this trend, startup accelerator programs have begun to adopt the methodology as their main organizing framework.At thesame time,coachesandtheircoaching practiceslieatthecoreofmanyacceleratorprograms. Despitethewidespreadrecognitionoftheimportanceofcoaching,thereisalackofknowledgeofhowtheroleofcoaches in accelerators interacts with the lean startup methodology. Using an ethnographic study design com-bined with interviews, this study investigates entrepreneur-coach relationships in the context of a university- based accelerator. The findings show that the lean startup methodology influences how entrepreneur-coach relationships evolve and how the formation and progression of these relationships facilitate learning amongentrepreneurs. The lean startup methodology creates conflict between the information collected from customers and the (perceived) authority of coaches. However, the entrepreneurial method also enables the coaching to be evolutionaryandassumption-changing.Suggestionsaremadeformitigatingchallengesrelatedtotheprogressofentrepreneurial activities and entrepreneur-coach relationships. 1. Introduction This study examines how adhering to the principles of the lean startupmethodology influencesentrepreneur-coachrelationships inthe context of an accelerator program. In recent years, accelerators have been gaining increasing --- providingdetailedexaminationsofthecoachingpracticesandnatureof entrepreneur-coach relationships (Adomdza, 2014). Against this back- drop, the purpose of this study is to investigate entrepreneur-coach relationships at a university-based accelerator in Sweden that follows the lean startup methodology. The research question guiding this study was ‘how the incorporation of the lean startup methodology into the processes of an accelerator influences the dynamics of relationships between entrepreneurs and their assigned coaches’? Here, an ethno- graphic approach is used to examine the lectures, seminars, and coaching sessions that form the backbone of a 15-week accelerator program. In addition, ten interviews with entrepreneurs and six inter- views with coaches were conducted to complement the extensive non- participatoryobservationaldata.Thisstudycontributestotheliterature on accelerators, entrepreneurial coaching, and the lean startup meth- odology in two ways. First, it develops a more in depth understanding of the role of coaches and coaching sessions in terms of both form and content. Second, it traces the instructions of the lean startup metho- dology throughout and beyond the coaching sessions to investigate the influence of the methodology as an organizing framework. 2. Frame of reference Thecurrentresearchsettinginvolvesthreemainspaceswithvarious levels of overlap: the lean startup methodology, entrepreneurial coaching and accelerators. These components will, therefore, be in- troduced here in this order to then qualify the ethnographic study where interrelations between these components will be investigated. 2.1. The lean startup methodology The lean startup methodology by Ries (2011) was inspired by the principles of the lean manufacturing (avoiding waste and optimizing resource spending) and the work of Steve Blank (Blank, 2006). The ideas in the methodology are reminiscent of contributions such as “disciplined entrepreneurship” (Sull, 2004),
inthe context of an accelerator program. In recent years, accelerators have been gaining increasing popularity (Hochberg, 2015). From a public policy perspective, it is widely acknowledged that university-based accelerators are important components of regional entrepreneurial ecosystems (McAdam et al., 2016). Accelerators are often limited- duration programs aimed at helping entrepreneurs to define their ideas and build their first prototypes. Traditionally, organizers of such pro- grams have resorted to business planning approaches as organizing framework in order to structure the training and other services they offer. However, as a response tothe move awayfrombusinessplanning approaches,manyacceleratorsnowadopttheleanstartupmethodology (Blank and Dorf, 2012; Ries, 2011), which focuses on iterative learningfrom potential customers (York and Danes, 2014). Many highly ranked accelerators, such as Y Combinator, Techstars, 500 Startups, and An- gelPad structure their services following the guidelines of the lean startup methodology. Although coaching is not addressed as part of the lean startup methodology, this study shows that the methodology in- fluences, in markedly disticnt ways, how knowledge is communicated withinentrepreneur-coachrelationships.Asaresult,thesupportiveanddevelopmental role of coaches (Ladd et al., 2015; Pauwels et al., 2016) changes from mentor and vehicle of knowledge transfer, in line with business planning, to facilitator of a hypothesis-testing practice, as per the lean startup methodology (Christiansen, 2009). Theemergenceoftheleanstartupmethodology hasintroducednew ways in which accelerators and services as part of them are structured. In addition to providing entrepreneurs with a more structured way of thinking and acting, the lean startup methodology provides an orga- nizing framework in which coaches can arrange their activities in new ways. The principles and instructions of the lean startup methodology are being widely implemented as --- startup methodology bycoaches asanorganizing framework.This is an effect beyond entrepreneurs cultivating strong ties and creating common identity, previously identified in accelerator programs (Bruneel et al., 2012). The lean startup methodology helps to structure entrepreneur-coach interactions, as well as, provides an environment with plenty of opportunities for vicarious learning among en- trepreneurs. Second, trust is a precondition for entrepreneurs to learn in a sys- tematicwayaspreviouslyfound(Rymer,2002).Moreover,Howtrustis built matters greatly. Trust instilled through the lean startup metho- dology as an organizing framework differs from the traditional way coaches have gained trust by using authority, previous success, and personal experiences and position. The latter arguably results in a functional business planning focused coaching style, whereas the lean startup methodology in the current study enabled an evolutionary coaching style transforming and developing entrepreneurs by inducing fundamental changes to their established assumptions (Argyris and Schön, 1974). Paying attention to microlevel interactions between accelerator coaches, their practices and entrepreneurs, thus, provides additional richness to our understanding of the relationship between the accel- erator environment and entrepreneurial performance (Soetanto and Jack, 2016; Van Weele et al., 2017). Our study suggests that the in- troduction of the lean start up methodology in accelerators changes the authority of coaches, possibly rendering them less assertive. While this enabled a more evolutionary coaching style, it also indicates that coaching theory in the context of accelerators need to deal with the dilemma between authority, expertise and assertiveness, on the one hand, and method-orientation on the other hand. Third,thereareanumberofcaveatsinrelationtothecontextofuse for the lean startup methodology. All the entrepreneurs examined here were working on ideas where interaction
The principles and instructions of the lean startup methodology are being widely implemented as part of lectures, seminars, and coaching sessions offered at accelerators. In this vein, coaches employ the structure of the methodology to organize their coaching sessions. These sessions are generally centered on topics such as customer in- teraction,hypothesisvalidation,andtheanalysisofgathereddata,allof which are at the center of the instructions of the lean startup metho-dology. The practices of the methodology are embedded within the coaching sessions and contribute to the regularities or irregularities of coaching practices. Despite the prevalence of accelerators and the importance of the role of coaches, relatively few studies have examined entrepreneur- coach relationships in any depth. Those that mention coaching tend to be limited to introducing the existence of such role, rather than https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2019.03.001 Received 17 March 2017; Received in revised form 22 February 2019; Accepted 7 March 2019E-mail address: yashar.mansoori@chalmers.se (Y. Mansoori).Technovation 84–85 (2019) 37– 47 Available online 14 March 2019 0166-4972/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license  (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/). T
methodology are reminiscent of contributions such as “disciplined entrepreneurship” (Sull, 2004), “discovery-driven plan- ning” (McGrath and MacMillan, 2000) and “probe and learn” (Lynn et al., 1996). The methodology benefits from a set of tools taken from other theories and methods, such as the customer development fra- mework (Blank and Dorf, 2012), rapid prototyping of design thinking (Brown, 2008), and agile software development principles (Dybå and Dingsøyr, 2008). Core to the lean startup methodology is validated learning throughpurposeful experimentation,inwhich the effectuation principlesofflexibilityandaffordableloss(ReadandSarasvathy,2005) areapplied(FredriksenandBrem,2017).Theleanstartupmethodology has a unique language, structure and strict advice. Therefore, it can be viewed as a metaphorical boundary object, enabling the wielders of the method to display their expertise (Koskinen, 2005). Validated learning highlights progress through a process of testing a set of carefully for- mulated assumptions and analyzing solid empirical data obtained from real customers (Maurya, 2012; Ries, 2011). The lean startup methodology as a cyclical process is grounded in three main sets of activities. First, entrepreneurs dissect their business ideas into testable assumption and map them onto the business model canvas (Osterwalder et al., 2005) as testable assumptions. This gra- phical respresentation contains all the key aspects that entrepreneurs should be relatively certain about. Second, entrepreneurs engage in a process designed to test the assumptions in realtion to their business ideas (Ries, 2011). The sequence of these tests is determined by the perceivedcriticalityoftheresultsofthetestsforthecontinuationofthe process. One way to test the assumptions is to prepare a “minimum viable product” (MVP). An MVP is a version of the product containing the smallest set of features, built using the minimum amount of time and resources and provides entrepreneurs with the --- startup methodology. All the entrepreneurs examined here were working on ideas where interaction with customers was key. This is in line with the lean startup methodology holding the customer as amain authority. However, ventures with lower levels of technological readiness (e.g., bioengineering or material sciences) might benefit from other methods than the likes of the lean startup methodology (Harms etal.,2015).Also,coachesinmorespecializedacceleratorscouldtakea larger role in offering networks for the benefit of their clients, as sug- gested by Baraldi and Ingemansson-Havenvid (2016) within medical sciences, rather than asking entrepreneurs to take on all such networkbuilding activities. Nevertheless, prescriptive entrepreneurial methods (Mansoori, 2018) such as the lean startup methodology, can play an important role in changing the relationship between the entrepreneurs and their coaches from functionalist and engagement to evolutionary. And fourth, entrepreneurial methods can be seen as vehicles for making coaches into agents of behavioral modifications rather than the de facto bearers of context dependent knowledge (Grant, 2006). As- sumption-changing behavior of entrepreneurs by coaches has pre- viously not been anticipated in research nor in the lean startup meth- odology itself. Research on entrepreneurial coaching, accelerators, and the broader entrepreneurship would benefit from more investigation of applied entrepreneurial methods. It should also strive to improve en- trepreneurial methods and devise novel ones that not only can illumi- nate the path for entrepreneurs but also help enrich the entrepreneur- coach relationships and by proxy benefit startup accelerators. Hence, this study opens a new conversation into the pragmatic role of entrepreneurial methods in understanding the dynamics of en- trepreneurial coaching. Entrepreneurial methods can be seen not only as tools to organize entrepreneurial activities but also as boundary objects (Koskinen,
features, built using the minimum amount of time and resources and provides entrepreneurs with the information re- quired to validate or invalidate their assumptions (Ries, 2011). After a rigorous evaluation of the results, the invalidated assumptions are re- placed by new assumptions and are then re-tested. This processcontinues until a reasonable number of tests validates the critical as-sumptions. Finally, entrepreneurs decide on the remaining assumptions based on their interactions with potential customers. A key concept in theleanstartupmethodologyisthe“product-marketfit.”Thefitimplies that the product idea has a market and, therefore, there are customers willing to pay for the value offered by the product (Blank and Dorf, 2012). The ultimate goal of the process is to guide entrepreneurs in finding this fit. 2.2. Entrepreneurial coaching Coachinghas beendefined in severalways: asallactivities aimedat bringing out the potential of individuals (Hargrove, 2000); all delib- erate intervention activities used to help individuals to develop and achieve their specified goals (Aas and Vavik, 2015); a structured two- way process to developing skills and competencies through “assess- ment, guided practical experience, and regular feedback” (Parsloe, 1999:1); and a set of practices to help individuals to learn (Whitmore, 1992). Coaching is suggested to be instrumental as a support measure (Audet and Couteret, 2012), as a structured framework to steer com- munications and conversations (Spence and Grant, 2007), as a tool to organize peer-learning (Kutzhanova et al., 2009), as a way to create a sense of peer pressure (Van Weele et al., 2015), as a function that createsasenseofbelongingtoalargergroup(Kutzhanovaetal.,2009), and, most importantly, as an aid to encourage action (Cooper et al., 2012; Flaherty, 2005). Inthisstudy,entrepreneurialcoachingisdefinedasthesupportthat entrepreneurs receive in the early stages of their entrepreneurial ac-tivities to help them to develop --- than direct experience, these episodes contribute to a larger knowledge base amongentrepreneurs andimpact theirinterpersonal relationships. Future research should investigate how the coaching style and or- ganization of accelerators affect the paradox of coaches being too au- thoritative in relation to entrepreneurs, potentially hampering the en- trepreneurs’ hypothesis-generation and testing efforts. In addition, the legitimacyofthemethodologymightbechallengedbythenatureofthe venturesbeingaccelerated.Futureresearchshouldinvestigatehowwell the methodology suits ventures that have lower technology readiness levels and other characteristics that affect the heterogeneity of theY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 45
receive in the early stages of their entrepreneurial ac-tivities to help them to develop and acquire necessary skills (Audet and Couteret,2012).Thekeytocoaching,ingeneral,andtoentrepreneurial coaching in particular is the notion of learning (Bachkirova et al., 2014).Often,ratherthanresolvingspecificproblems,coachesprovidea contextwithinwhichentrepreneurscandeveloptheskillsandexpertise needed to solve the problems that may arise. Coaching includes all the various ways of helping entrepreneurs in startup accelerator programs, where entrepreneurs lack knowledge, skills, and experience. Therefore, coaches can help entrepreneurs to extract entrepreneur-driven solu- tions. Although sometimes valuable, it is not necessarily the startup background and practical experience of coaches that defines en- trepreneur-coach relationships (Britton, 2010). The productiveness of the relationship between coaches and en- trepreneurs is influenced by factors such as the equality of power be- tween the two sides of the coaching relationship, the extent to which a culture of collaborative learning is promoted, the effectiveness of communication, and the tools and techniques used to facilitate the developmental efforts (Cox et al., 2014; Schein, 1987). In order to promote openness and trust within an entrepreneurial coaching re- lationship, it is advised to avoid a hierarchy between the coach (who can be viewed as the facilitator of learning) and the entrepreneur (O’Broin and Palmer, 2009; Schein, 1987). Moreover, communications can be facilitated effectively through practices such as “listening, clar- ifying, encouraging reflection and criticality, and questioning” (Cox et al., 2014:6), which have been shown to be reliable vehicles for col- laborative learning (Cox, 2013). Therefore, the quality of these re- lationships impacts effective learning by facilitating and speeding up learning episodes. Entrepreneurial coaching relationships can be divided into three archetypes: functionalist, --- Couteret, 2012). By posing questions that allow entrepreneurs to openly discuss their pro- gress, be proud of their progress, and ask for help in domains where they lack experience and expertise, coaches can create trust without seeming incompetent. Trust helps to form the pretext to learning from the coaching ses- sions,namely,acknowledgingalackofexperienceandexpertiserelated to specific tasks and the skills necessary to perform the expected ac- tivities. This signals the need for learning and acquiring newY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 43 --- knowledge, creating closer relationships between entrepreneurs and their coaches (Kutzhanova et al., 2009). It also encourages honest in- teractions with the coaches. Entrepreneurs’ initial and continued com- mitment to fruitful relationships with their coaches and their will- ingness to change their behavior and actions are critical to the quality of interactions (Audet and Couteret, 2012; Peterson and Millier, 2005). Sustained trust between entrepreneurs and their coaches increases the likelihood of adopting the structures put in place by the coaches. Previous studies note that coaches should adopt the role of pro- vidingthenecessarystructureforentrepreneurs(Raginsetal.,2016).In the case of the studied accelerator program, the coaches employed the structure of the lean startup methodology, offering shared mental models and additional points of departure. The methodology facilitates interactions and conversations between entrepreneurs and their coa- ches. By coupling this with inspirational seminars, coaches created le- gitimacy for the lean startup methodology as the structuring frame- work. Inherent in its logic, the methodology encourages flexibility and openness to change, resulting in a space where entrepreneurs are more likely to change their behavior, attitude, knowledge base, and to adopt new tools. The current approach resembles an evolutionary coaching strategy aimed at transforming and developing entrepreneurs by in- ducing fundamental changes to their established assumptions (BrockbankandMcGill,2006).Thiscontrastswithbusinessplan-driven coaching, which tends to be more functional in style. It has been suggested that coaches’ expertise has a direct impact on the outcomes of their coachingactivities (Spence and Grant,2007; Sue- Chan and Latham, 2004). Coaches' advocating for the lean startup methodology contributes to their perceived experience and expertise. Entrepreneurs’ perceptions of coaches’ expertise are important to the coaches’ legitimacy.
Entrepreneurial coaching relationships can be divided into three archetypes: functionalist, engagement, and evolutionary. In a function- alistcoaching relationship,thedesiredoutcomeofthecoachingepisodes isincrementalchangestoroutinesandactivities,withnomajorrevision of entrepreneurs’ existing norms and values (Brockbank, 2008). Func- tionalist coaching is directive, didactic, and advice-driven in principle (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). The learning outcome in this style is single-loop learning (Argyris and Schön, 1974). A drawback of this approach is that it views the entrepreneur as “detached, disembodied, and passive” (Brockbank and McGill, 2006:30).Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 38 --- In anengagement coaching relationship, similar to functionalist coaching, the desired outcome is incremental improvement in routines, while preserving existing norms and values. However, in this case, this happens in a non-directive manner. To minimize resistance from en- trepreneurs, the coach adopts a humanistic and relationship-driven approach (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). This relationship places greater value on learning and change (Brockbank, 2008). The learning outcome in this style is also single-loop learning (Argyris and Schön, 1974) but includes the potential for reflection (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). In contrast to functionalist and engagement coaching, in an evolu- tionary coaching relationship, the desired outcome is transformational development induced by fundamental changes to the established as- sumptions held by entrepreneurs. Similar to an engagement coach, an evolutionary coach adopts a humanistic and relationship-driven ap- proach to learning (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). The learning out- come in this style is double-loop learning (Argyris and Schön, 1974), which promotes the personal and professional development of en- trepreneurs, leading them to improve their existing norms and values (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). Here, the coach helps entrepreneurs to take ownership of their learning and development. The main distin- guishingfeatureofevolutionarycoachingistheplatformitprovidesfor 'reflective dialogue' with entrepreneurs (Brockbank and McGill, 2006). In the context of this study, coaches engage in an evolutionary ap- proach,investingmoretimeinassistingthoughtandreflectionasaway to facilitate learning and development rather than directing en- trepreneurs’ actions. 2.3. Startup accelerators The empirical setting of this study is that of startup accelerators. As a rapidly growing phenomenon, startup accelerators are viewed as a mutation of incubators (Wise and Valliere, 2014), providing more ser- vices than those offered by traditional
incubators (Wise and Valliere, 2014), providing more ser- vices than those offered by traditional incubators to early-stage busi- nesses. In comparison with incubators, accelerators are “fixed-term, cohort-based programs” that include educational and inspirational elements inaddition tocoachingand “culminateina public pitchevent or a demo day” in front of a group of potential investors (Cohen and Hochberg, 2014:4). One of the first accelerators, Y Combinator, was established in the United States in 2005, and has since inspired many others. As part of accelerator programs, entrepreneurs are offered a work space, educational and coaching possibilities, and access to the accelerator’s alumni, network of coaches, and organizers, including venture capitalists, experienced entrepreneurs, and corporate execu- tives (Bruneelet al.,2012). Thesupportive environment of accelerators provides peer learning and peer support, allowing for opportunities for networking and referrals. Being affiliated with an accelerator con- tributes to creating an entrepreneur’s brand and actsas a legitimization tool, helping the entrepreneur to establish contacts and raise necessary funds (Wise and Valliere, 2014). In contrast with incubators, an im- portant value-added service is the role played by coaches. However, despite the growing interest in accelerators from policymakers, private and public investors, universities, and even corporations (Mian et al., 2016), little is known about the role of coaches and their coaching in the context of accelerators. This study relies on data gathered from an accelerator housed by Chalmers Ventures, the incubation and seed-funding subsidiary of Chalmers University of Technology in Sweden. Chalmers is recognized as an entrepreneurial university that emphasizes venture creation (Berggren, 2011; Clarysse and Bruneel, 2007; Jacob et al., 2003; Lundqvist, 2014; Lundqvist and Williams-Middleton, 2008; Ollila and Williams-Middleton, 2011; Wright, 2007). The
Lundqvist and Williams-Middleton, 2008; Ollila and Williams-Middleton, 2011; Wright, 2007). The accelerator program runs for 15 weeks and offers access to its network, coaching, and educational facilities for up to 20 entrepreneurial teams in each cohort. Likemostaccelerators,theaimofthisacceleratorprogramistohelp a business idea or an existing venture to become growth andinvestment-ready (Davila et al., 2010). The accelerator program offersoffice spaces, networking and financing events, dedicated business coaching,andvisitsfromserialentrepreneursandculminatesinademo day. The program bears direct resemblance to the Y Combinator pro- gram in terms of its structure. However, the competition to get into the studied accelerator is lower than Y Combinator, and a consequence is that the ventures in the studied accelerator are younger than those in Y Combinator. Entrepreneurs apply to join the accelerator program while in the earlystagesofthedevelopmentoftheirideasandareputingroupswith assigned coaches. The coaches include successful entrepreneurs, ac- celerator program alumni, venture capitalists, lawyers, angel investors, andcorporateexecutives.Theacceleratorprogramalsooffersanumber of educational lectures covering a wide range of topics in line with the lean startup methodology. The program is structured into three phases, each lasting five weeks. After the second phase, there is a selection process, with almost half of the teams being eliminated. The remaining teams continue through the third phase before pitching their ideas, receivingfeedback,andansweringquestionsposedbyinvestorsandthe public on the final demo day. 3. Data and methods 3.1. Research methods Ithasbeenarguedthatthecombinationofethnography,interviews, andotherdata-collectionmethodscanresultinimportantcontributions as this provides mechanism-based explanations and rich descriptive accounts that cross and connect different levels of analysis (Vaughan, 2009). Ethnography can be understood as “research --- accelerator program. Furthermore, focusing on the relationship be- tween novices and seniority in coaching when using the methodology could be a promising avenue for future research. Finally, this study focused on entrepreneur-coach relationships while indicating the im- portance of team learning and other forms of peer learning within an accelerator. Future research should consider how such vicarious and experiential learning are affected by the lean startup methodology and other entrepreneurial methods. References Aas,M.,Vavik,M.,2015.Groupcoaching:anewwayofconstructingleadershipidentity? Sch. Leadersh. Manag. 35, 251–265. Adomdza,G.,2014.Choosingbetweenastudent-runandprofessionallymanagedventure accelerator. Entrep. Theory Pract. 40, 943–956. Aldrich, H., Baker, T., 1997. Blinded by the cites? Has there been progress in en- trepreneurship research? In: Sexton, D., Smilor, R. (Eds.), Entrepreneurship 2000. Upstart Publishing Company, Chicago, IL, pp. 377–400. Argyris, C., Schön, D.A., 1974. Theory in Practice: Increasing Professional Effectiveness. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA. Audet, J., Couteret, P., 2012. Coaching the entrepreneur: features and success factors. J. Small Bus. Enterp. Dev. 19, 515–531. Bachkirova, T., Cox, E., Clutterbuck, D., 2014. Introduction. In: Cox, E., Bachkirova, T., Clutterbuck,D.(Eds.),TheCompleteHandbookofCoaching.Sage,London,pp.1–20. Baraldi, E., Ingemansson-Havenvid, M., 2016. Identifying new dimensions of business incubation: a multi-level analysis of Karolinska Institute's incubation system. Technovation 50, 53–68. Berggren, E., 2011. The entrepreneurial university’s influence on commercialization of academic research–the illustrative case of Chalmers University of Technology. Int. J. Entrep. Small Bus. 12, 429–444. Blank, S., 2006. The Four Steps to the Epiphany. Cafepress, San Francisco, CA.Blank, S., Dorf, B., 2012. The Startup Owner’s Manual: The Step-by-Step Guide for Building a Great Company. K&S Ranch, Incorporated, San
connect different levels of analysis (Vaughan, 2009). Ethnography can be understood as “research conducted by si- tuating oneself in a social setting to observe and analyze individual interaction in order to understand some complex social process, event,activity, or outcome” (Vaughan, 2009:690). Ethnographers spend time in their research setting and become immersed in the activities that need attention, including the beginning and ending points. Further- more,theyenterthefieldwithnoclearguidelinesastohowtheprocess might evolve. According to Aldrich and Baker (1997), there is a lack of ethnographical research in the field of entrepreneurship, to which Martinez et al. (2011) concur. This study adopts ethnography as a re- search method to investigate the actions and social interactions in the context of a startup accelerator program. Thus, the empirical evidence is based on ethnographic data, including exploratory non-participant observations,interviews,andsecondarydata,assistingingeneratingan empirically grounded understanding of entrepreneur-coach relation- ships. 3.2. Sample The sample initially consisted of 17 entrepreneurial teams and 41 entrepreneurs. All teams were composed of at least two entrepreneurs and were encouraged to participate in all scheduled activities. The sample included a broad range of participants in terms of age, gender, education, and experience. The accelerator program included three phases. At the end of the second phase, the organizers identified 10 teamstoproceedtothethirdphase.Thus,thesamplewaslimitedtothe remaining teams for further interviews and a closer examination of their processes, although the data gathered through observation up to that point included all 17 teams. This was simply the result of a lack of access to the eliminated teams. During some of the interviews, team members other than the lead entrepreneurs participated, but for sim- plicity, they were treated as a single group in the analysis of the col- lected data. For --- 3.3. Data collection The empirical data for this study were collected through ethno- graphicfieldresearchduringspringandsummerof2016.Thisincluded non-participant observations, in-depth semi-structured interviews, weekly qualitative questionnaires, the cohort’s public Slack channel (a cloud-based team collaboration tool), and field notes collected during the coaching sessions, lectures, and inspirational seminars. During the 15 weeks of the accelerator program, the lead author was physically present at the accelerator and followed nearly all of the activities. All lectures, inspirational seminars, and coaching sessions were recorded. During the weekly coaching sessions, the lead author attended one of the sessions and recorded the other two. Interviews with the lead en- trepreneurs of the 10 teams who proceeded to the third phase, as well as with the six coaches involved in the accelerator program were con- ducted. The interviews lasted 80min each, on average, and were re- corded and transcribed verbatim. Three sets of qualitative ques- tionnaires were sent on a weekly basis: one at the beginning of the week, one after the coaching sessions, and one after the lectures and inspirational seminars. The entrepreneurs were asked about the activ- ities they had undertaken, their learning, and their plans for the up- comingweek.Allthepublicinteractionsbetweentheentrepreneursand their coaches as well as other entrepreneurs, which were documented on the program’s Slack channel were closely monitored and coded. Table 3demonstrates the data sources. 3.4. Data analysis The data were analyzed inductively using grounded methodology principles, following natural language coding and categorization (Miles and Huberman, 1984). All empirical data were imported into a quali- tative data analysis application (Atlas.ti) and open-coded at the level of smallest meaning units (Strauss and Corbin, 1998). The codes include a wide range of topics, such as inclusion of the lean startup
for sim- plicity, they were treated as a single group in the analysis of the col- lected data. For instance, statements from entrepreneurs who were part of Startup 1 are presented as S1. Tables 1 and 2 provide additional details about the entrepreneurs and coaches, respectively.Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 39 --- Three sets of weekly online questionnaires 471 data points Researcher’s notes Non-participant observations in the program 65 pages Recordings 27 group coaching sessions 20h Table 4The emerging themes and categories. Themes Categories Example codes Coaching form •The lean startup methodology and the entrepreneur-coach dynamics•Coaches and the position of authority•Coaches and their legitimacy•Coaching sessions and revised structure•Coaching sessions and facilitation of trust formation•The coaches’ expectations from the entrepreneurs in line with the methodology•Valuing coaches’ opinions higher than external sources of data•Coaches’ knowledge about the methodology creating credibility•Commitment to the lean startup methodology as a structuring framework•Building trust facilitated by the demands of the methodology to share progress and problems Coaching content •Coaching sessions and changes in activities undertaken•Coaching sessions and changes in mindset•Coaching and elevated self-confidence•Coaching and elevated self-efficacy•A systematic approach to validating ideas facilitating interactions with coaches•Understanding changes and openness to flexibility•Group coaching as a tool contributing to self-confidence•Changes in perception related to the difficulty of starting a new business Coaching context •Social aspectsof the coaching sessions(interactions with the coaches)•Social aspects of the coaching sessions (interactions with the other entrepreneurs)•Coaching sessions and opportunities for peer learning•Competition and progress•Coaching sessions and peer pressure•Coaches encouraging more discussion and participation•Entrepreneurs sharing contacts and offer help•Entrepreneurs sharing plans on how they validated their hypotheses•Competition as a motivating factor for entrepreneurs to contact customers•Coaching session as a mechanism to pressure entrepreneurs into more actionY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 42
and Corbin, 1998). The codes include a wide range of topics, such as inclusion of the lean startup methodology as part of the accelerator program, coaches and their positions of au- thority, the role of coaching sessions in creating legitimacy for the coaches, the impact of the coaching sessions on entrepreneurs’ mental development, and the role of the social setting in developing necessary skills.Tolimitthebroadcategorizationprocess,thedatawerearranged using the codes and categories related to the entrepreneur-coach re- lationships. The rationale behind focusing on these codes and cate- gories, and excluding others, follows the purpose of the study, which revolves around an explicit entrepreneurial method, the pronounced role of coaches, and the social aspects of the coaching sessions. For instance, the category “lack of instructions on the level of tools and tactics”wasexcludedbecauseitpertainstothedesignoftheaccelerator programratherthantoentrepreneur-coachrelationships.Thisstructure providedarichandconcisenarrativeofevents. Table4presentsthemes and categories.4. Findings Inlinewith Table4,thefindingssectionisorganizedintothreesub- sections, corresponding to the three larger themes. Therefore, eachtheme is discussed by providing quotes from the entrepreneurs and coaches for the identified categories. The findings section focuses pri- marily on the impact of incorporating and applying the lean startup methodology on entrepreneur-coach relationships along the three themes of coaching form, coaching content, and coaching context. 4.1. Coaching form The first theme refers broadly to the elements of the accelerator program that impact the structure of coaching sessions. It provides texture to the dynamics of the entrepreneur-coach relationships and offersinsightsintotheroleplayedbytheinstructionsoftheleanstartup methodology. The entrepreneurs and their coaches interacted through individual and group coaching sessions, as well as during educational lectures. A large
through individual and group coaching sessions, as well as during educational lectures. A large number of these interactions were influenced by the ideas and the instructions of the lean startup methodology. The teamof coaches decided to follow a common structure during the coaching sessions. They explicitly asked entrepreneurs to prepare status updates describingtheircontactswithpeopleoutsidetheirteams,pastactivities relatedtovalidatingtheirhypotheses,andplansforupcomingactivities as well as the insights they gathered from those activities (to provide a space for peer learning). This agenda helped to structure the interac- tions between coaches and entrepreneurs in ways that made en- trepreneurs aware of the activities expected of them and, therefore, facilitated their progress in line with the expectations of the coaches. According to the coaches, this agenda was designed to “provide di- rectionandconfidence”[C1,C3,C4],“helptodevelopnewwaysofthinking and necessary skills” [C1, C5], “induce peer pressure and increase en- gagement” [C1, C6], “encourage sharing experiences and helping each other” [C5, C6], and “cultivate a sense of belonging” [C2, C5, C6]. One of the coaches explained the process of setting the agenda as follows: “We satdownanddiscussedafewheadlinesandthenwedugintothose.Icansay that we finally landed on following the lean startup methodology in every- thingwedid”[C1].Moreover,allcoachesclaimedthattheyfollowedthe principles and instructions of the lean startup methodology explicitly when organizing their coaching sessions and their individual relation- shipswiththeteamstheycoached.Considerthefollowingstatement:“I think that the lean startup methodology and all the tools such as business model canvas give the entrepreneurs and us coaches ways to structure in- formation and find gaps in our knowledge to be able to treat some of the uncertainties and make sense of various situations” [C5]. The inclusion of the lean startup methodology also impacted how --- aspect of the coaching sessions was to make the entrepreneurs follow the lean startup methodology, report back on the insights they had gained through customer interactions and capitalize on the social nature of the coaching sessions. The intention was to encourage further interactionsandlearningpossibilitiesduringthecoachingsessions.One of the coaches expressed this as follows: “The point is that we wanted them to get out of the building and conduct interviews, to start interacting with their customers and report them back. We explicitly asked them for solid evidence and the implications of the evidence collected through those interactions”[C3].Ingeneral,thecoachesencouragedtheentrepreneurs to “raise the bar” [C2, C5, C6] by increasing the number of interactions in subsequent weeks. The coaches used the lean startup methodology to add richness to the social interactions of the coaching sessions. They encouraged en- trepreneurstoseethemselvesinthecoachinggroupsasmembersof“the collective brain” [C5] and, therefore, find ways to help their fellow en- trepreneurs by being supportive at all times. Many of the interactions among entrepreneurs were influenced by the instructions of the lean startup methodology. As a result, entrepreneurs shared their experi- ences and received feedback from other entrepreneurs: “We spend a lot of time with each other working out a map of where we should be going, what we should be doing, and planning activities while giving each other feedback. We gave advice or got inspiration. For instance, we got interesting feedback on the experiments we had designed to validate some of ourhypotheses” [S9]. One of the coaches described the dynamics of the coaching sessions as follows: “When entrepreneurs talked about a parti- cular topic, they knew that others may have gone through the same process before.So,theywantedtoknowwhatandhowothershavemanagedvarious issuesandwhattheirlearningwas”[C2].Anothercoachcharacterizedthe coaching sessions as learning
sense of various situations” [C5]. The inclusion of the lean startup methodology also impacted how coaches were viewed by the entrepreneurs during the coaching ses-sions. The structure signalled legitimacy of coaches' experience and facilitated trust between them and the entrepreneurs. The explicit ad- herence to the instructions of the lean startup methodology eventually had a positive influence on the entrepreneur-coach relationships andTable 1 Entrepreneurs and their teams. Idea Prototype before the program Prior knowledge of LSMaMajor changes Finished prototype (S1) Online diagnosis of urinary tract infection No None No Yes (S2) Property registration platform No None No Not completed (S3) Market research platform Yes Limited familiarity Yes Yes (S4) Matchmaking tool for the sublet market No Previous courses Yes Not completed (S5) Digital recruitment service No Limited familiarity Yes Not completed (S6) Sleep optimization app No None No Yes (S7) Online ecological shop No Limited familiarity Yes Yes (S8) Gardeners logging app Yes Limited familiarity No Yes (S9) Smart textile for road workers No None Yes Yes (S10) App for diabetes No None Yes Not completed aThe lean startup methodology.Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 40 --- the lean startup methodology Chalmers Ventures, Chalmers Innovation S6, S9, S10 (C6)One-and-a-half years No Books, online resources, course at Palo Alto Chalmers Ventures S6, S9, S10Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 41
created a sense that the coaches possessed the relevant expertise: “I listen to my coach because his knowledge is the sum of years of reading, interactions and solid experiences. I would listen to someone who is an ex- pert in the lean startup processes rather than one who just expresses opi- nions” [S7]. This legitimacy was used directly to resolve internal con- flicts in the teams by referencing the instructions received from the coaches that followed those of the lean startup methodology: “If I said somethingandmyteammembersdisagreedandthenIconfrontedthemwith whatourcoachhadsaid,theyagreedwithmypointaloteasierbecausethey valued our coach’s expertise especially regarding the lean startup metho- dology” [S5]. Moreover, several factors led to the coaches being viewed as figures ofauthority.Placingdemandsontheentrepreneursinlinewiththelean startup methodology, requiring that they structure their activities around them, and the filtering process after the second phase were important factors in the conditioning of the entrepreneur-coach re- lationships.Oneoftheentrepreneursofferedthefollowingstatementin response to a hypothetical question: “If I talk to a bunch of people and then they tell me that an aspect of my idea does not make any sense, and then I consult my coach and he advises me to the contrary, I listen to my coach” [S3]. One of the coaches expressed concern about the un- reasonable trust and authority that this created: “Ifthe coachsaysgoleft and the customer says go right, then the entrepreneurs go left. It is because they have unsound expectations of their coach. Unfortunately, the en- trepreneurshaveabittoomuchrespectforourauthority”[C1]. Inaddition to providing a structure and direction for the coaching sessions and entrepreneur-coach relationships, the instructions of the methodology influenced the thinking and actions of the entrepreneurs. 4.2. Coaching content The second theme refers broadly to the implicit and explicit effects of the lean startup
content The second theme refers broadly to the implicit and explicit effects of the lean startup methodology as the organizing framework on the knowledge content throughout the coaching sessions. Participating in coaching sessions and being exposed to the instructions of the lean startup methodologyledtoa numberofsalientchangesintheactivities undertaken by the entrepreneurs. As part of the coaching sessions, entrepreneurs were asked to map their assumptions about their busi- ness ideas to the business model canvas: “Early in the process, we were supposed to map our critical hypotheses about our target customers, docu- ment them on the [business model] canvas and immediately start talking to themtofigureoutwhetherornottheproblemweaimtosolveactuallyexists outside of our heads” [S4]. Moreover, the coaches explicitly required that entrepreneurs contact potential customers and collect feedback on their ideas: “Our coaches made us goout and talk to as many customers as possible, and report the insights gained through those interactions during coachingsessions.Asitbecamecompetitivebetweentheteams,wepushedallour team members to talk to an even larger number of people” [S1]. The newly introduced activities in the coaching sessions led to new routines and processes: “Every single step we now take is based on the knowledgewe have gathered fromvalidatedsources, mainlyfrom customers and users. Now, every decision we make is based on validated assumptions” [S5]. These new routines eventually translated into new ways ofviewing the venture-creation process. That is, the entrepreneurs’mindset related to reasonable and rational ways to proceed was mod- ified: “Having participated in the coaching sessions and through interacting with our coaches, I think it is fair to believe that when one has an idea, one needs to bounce it back and forth with others in general and customers in particular and consider the feedback one gets after thorough evaluation” [S9]. As a result of the lean --- methodology” [S8]. In addition to providing content and form, the inclusion of the lean startup methodology, coupled with the social nature of the coaching sessions, proved to be influential in terms of knowledge accumulation, motivation, and confidence. 4.3. Coaching context The third theme refers broadly to the role played by the context of the coaching sessions in combination with the instructions of the lean startup methodology. This theme focuses on the interactions within the coaching sessions, both between the entrepreneurs and the coaches, and among the entrepreneurs. One of the entrepreneurs described his experience of receiving feedback from his coach as moments that pro- vided himwith newperspectivesthat he had previouslyneglected:“Weattended the coaching sessions each week with the perception that we had confirmed or disconfirmed some of the assumptions about our idea. During these sessions, coaches gave us new angles of perception by arguing in line with the [the lean startup] methodology, even though we thought we had confirmed some aspects of our idea. In many cases, this led us to different directions altogether” [S10]. One of the coaches noted that an importantTable 2 Coaches and their experiences. Experience at the acceleratorCoachtrainingKnowledge about the lean startup methodology Coaching experience Startupscoached (C1) Four years No Trips to California, books, online resources Business plan competitions, Chalmersventures, Chalmers InnovationS1,S2,S4,S5 (C2) Two years No Books and online resources Chalmers Ventures S1,S2,S4,S5 (C3) Four years No Trips to California, books, online resources BornGlobal, Chalmers Innovation S3, S7, S8 (C4) 15 years No Books, online resources, lectures by proponents of the lean startup methodology Chalmers Ventures, Chalmers Innovation S3, S7, S8 (C5) 16 years Yes Books, online resources, lectures by proponents of the lean startup methodology Chalmers Ventures, Chalmers Innovation S6, S9, S10 (C6)One-and-a-half
and consider the feedback one gets after thorough evaluation” [S9]. As a result of the lean startup methodology, coaching sessions also created an environment in which entrepreneurs gained self-confidence and self-efficacy. This was facilitated by coaching sessions that pro- videdaforuminwhichentrepreneurscoulddiscusstheirachievements, share their experiences, receive recognition and help other en- trepreneurs, and perceive a level of expertise. Despite failing to fully execute his idea and create the firstprototype, one ofthe entrepreneurs expressed more confidence in pursuing new ideas: “I hope we would continue with our idea but if we do not succeed with it, I feel much more comfortable pursuing a new idea or starting a new company in the future becauseinteractingwithourcoachesgaveusthisexperienceandhelpedusto collect necessary knowledge in relation to starting a new business” [S6]. Another entrepreneur claimed that he now has a clear process for starting a new business: “By completing this accelerator program and participating in the coaching sessions, I believe it is more accessible for us to pursue another idea because I have the experience. Our participation in the coaching sessions and learning from our coaches make me believe that we have a much better overview of the entrepreneurial process” [S2]. In addition to higher self-confidence, entrepreneurs generally ex- pressed higher self-efficacy. Having access to new ways of doing things was instrumental in their perceived self-efficacy. They reported that beinginstructedbythecoachesabouttheleanstartupmethodologyhas helped to improve their chances of success, both during and after the acceleratorprogram:“Iamalreadyresearchinganumberofdifferentideas at the moment.I definitely feelnow thatI have ahigher chance ofbecoming successful at starting my business than if I have not learned about the [the lean startup] methodology” [S8]. In addition to providing content and form, the inclusion of the lean startup --- other entrepreneurs and contributing to discussions” [C3]. In general, en- trepreneurs were positive about the competitive side of the coaching sessions and associated some of their progress to this specific element: “Thecoachesmadeitintoacompetitionbetweenus.Ithinkthatitwaswhen they pushed the hardest that we progressed the most by fighting the mostduring this experience” [S8]. 4.4. A brief summary of the key findings The findings suggest several ways in which the lean startup meth- odology influenced the entrepreneur-coach relationships. The coaches were tasked with providing direction and confidence and help en- trepreneurs to develop their thinking and gather necessary skills. However, the dynamics of the coaching sessions were more similar to a traditional leader–follower structure. The lean startup methodology enabled coaches to create the sense of trust and competence necessary to establish productive entrepreneur-coach relationships. The coaches’ advice in line with the instructions of the lean startup methodology helped to reduce team conflict by resolving intra-team deadlocks. Interestingly, the entrepreneur-coach relationships were shown to beat odds with the basic theoretical principles of the lean startup metho- dology,namely,thathypothesesshouldbetestedagainstempiricaldata collected through interactions with potential customers, rather than having theory or authority be the key principles guiding action. A particular aspect of the coaching sessions was the opportunities it provided for social and peer learning. This affected the entrepreneur- coach relationships, as well as how the coaching sessions were struc- tured and organized. Lastly, entrepreneurs felt they benefited from the competitive environment. 5. Discussion This study explores the relationships between entrepreneurs and their coaches within the context of an accelerator, guided and struc- tured explicitly by the instructions of the lean startup methodology. Employinganethnographicresearch
issuesandwhattheirlearningwas”[C2].Anothercoachcharacterizedthe coaching sessions as learning and developmental episodes, leading to entrepreneursbondoverknowledgeand,thus,benefitfromeachother’s expertise: “The relationships can get more solidified. When two en- trepreneurs with quite different opinions on something discussed during the coaching sessions, they triggered something in each other. The group nature of the coaching sessions allowed for this to happen. I think the bonding over the knowledge and the ensuing friendships between the entrepreneurs were important outcomes of using the lean startup methodology in the coaching sessions” [C1]. In addition, the nature of these coaching sessions provided a ple- thora of possibilities for peer learning and peer pressure. The coaches consciously created a competitive setting, which contributed to the formation of these possibilities. On several occasions, entrepreneurs discussed learning events that had resulted from second-hand experi- ences during the coaching sessions. By virtue of being present at the coaching sessions, entrepreneurs succeeded in accumulating relevant knowledge in line with the lean startup methodology that proved helpfultotheirprocesses.Considerthefollowingstatementfromoneof the entrepreneurs during an informal chat with the lead author: “ITable 3 Empirical data. Data type Sources of data Details Interviews Six coaches 8h 12 entrepreneurs 11h Observations 12 group coaching sessions 12.6h Seven lectures and six seminars 20h Discussions between coaches during pre-program selection meeting 2h Discussions between coaches during mid-program selection meeting 3h 17 elevator pitches during demo day at the end of phase 2 4h 10 15-min pitches during final demo day 3h Presentations PowerPoint slides 27 slide decks Messages and discussions Slack channel communications 40 pages Qualitative questionnaires Three sets of weekly online questionnaires 471 data points Researcher’s notes Non-participant --- remember several occasions during the coaching sessions that one of the entrepreneurs asked a question or shared a specific experience and the question was exactly what I was pondering about or the insights from the experience were very relevant to my own process” [S10]. The coaches viewed the coaching sessions as arenas in which entrepreneurs could give each other feedback and listen to and learn from each other’s ex- periences: “The main goal behind the coaching sessions was to build an effectiveculturewhereentrepreneurssharedexperiencesandgaveeachother leads” [C6]. Moreover, the coaches placed pressure on the entrepreneurs by exposing them to other entrepreneurs’ achievements. They structured the coaching sessions in a way that the entrepreneurs were required to give status updates, including critical insights gained through their interactions with customers. This helped the coaches to create pressure and provide encouragement and, therefore, get entrepreneurs to raise their ambitions: “We certainly wanted to make it more efficient by having peer pressure among the teams. The idea was to expose them to what other teams have really been up to, talking to people, getting a deeper under- standing, and getting more meaningful contacts with potential customers” [C4]. This resulted in a competitive environment in which some en- trepreneurs tried to surpass others by becoming more proactive and persistentinattractingtheattentionoftheircoaches:“Itwasgoodforthe entrepreneurs to listen and see how other teams were progressing in relation to what they were doing. It became somehow a competitive environment. Whenwegavethematask,theydidnotwanttocomebackandbetheworst guys in the room. They knew that at the end of the day, there was a qua- lification for them to be able to continue in the accelerator program. I think thisresultedinthemperformingbetterbybeinginasocialsetting,listeningto other entrepreneurs and contributing to discussions” [C3]. In general, en- trepreneurs were
explicitly by the instructions of the lean startup methodology. Employinganethnographicresearch design,thisstudyoffersimportant insight into the coaching practices and how the inclusion of the lean startup methodology helps to influence and shape coaching practices.The discussion section is divided into four sub-sections: the structure ofthe coaching sessions, the dynamics governing the entrepreneur-coach relationships, the paradox of data in relation to authority, and the vi- carious learning that occurs during these coaching sessions. 5.1. The structure of coaching sessions The experience of entering an accelerator program and facing si- milar challenges has been found to cultivate strong ties and create a common identity among entrepreneurs (Bruneel et al., 2012). Previous studies have shown that participating in lectures and inspirational seminars relevant to problems faced by entrepreneurs contributes to an increased knowledge base among the participants (Davidsson and Honig, 2003). In the current case, coaches organized the coaching sessions following the lean startup methodology to encourage en- trepreneurs to act and to allow for their transparent evaluation. This included encouraging entrepreneurs to share detailed accounts of their activities specific to the lean startup methodology in order to build bonds among them. The setup of the studied accelerator program culminated in the announcement of a winning team that was offered investment and created a competitive environment. Therefore, there was both a com- munal feeling among entrepreneurs where collaborating and co- operating was the norm as well as a sense of competition and rivalry (Bøllingtoft, 2012). The adoption of the lean startup methodology fos- teredbotheffects.Onthe onehand,itledto entrepreneurscarryingout activities to attract the attention of their coaches. On the other hand, entrepreneurs used coaching sessions based on the lean startup meth-
coaches. On the other hand, entrepreneurs used coaching sessions based on the lean startup meth- odologyasopportunitiestocollectivelymakesenseofthemethodology. Entrepreneurs attempted to understand the instructions of the metho- dology through repeated discussion and reflection, both with coaches and other entrepreneurs. This can be interpreted as a process of knowledgeinternalization(Nonaka etal.,1996)aswell astheadoption of certain guiding principles (Argyris and Schön, 1974). 5.2. The dynamics of entrepreneur-coach relationships Effective relationships between coaches and entrepreneurs and among entrepreneurs are conditioned by the process of their initiation: formally, under a pre-established structure as part of an initiative (e.g., an accelerator program), or informally, through personal relationships between coaches and entrepreneurs (Eby and Lockwood, 2005). In the accelerator program, the formation of these relationships was pre- determined by the organizers. That is, entrepreneurs and coaches were paired based on coaches’ interests in the business ideas. The initial dynamics of the relationships were impacted directly by the introduc- tionoftheleanstartupmethodology.Thiswasanaturaloutcomeofthe methodology defining and dictating the structure and content of the coaching sessions. The effectiveness of these entrepreneur-coach relationships is lar- gely dependent on an environment of trust and closeness. Trust has been identified as a precondition for channeling coaches’ expertise to supportentrepreneurs’learninginasystematicway(Rymer,2002).The methodology directs coaches’ conversations in the coaching sessions and aligns their expectations with the perceived expectations of en- trepreneurs. This provides a common starting point for discussions, highlights coaches’ skills in relation to the lean startup methodology and leads to a sense of mutual trust (Audet and Couteret, 2012). By posing questions that allow entrepreneurs to openly discuss their pro- gress,
Entrepreneurs’ perceptions of coaches’ expertise are important to the coaches’ legitimacy. However, other characteristics of coaches, such as their familiarity with the subject area and previous experience in coaching, too, influence their legitimacy and the entrepreneur-coach relationships. Hence, the lean startup methodology coupled with thecoaches’expertiseinfluenceentrepreneur-coachrelationshipsinspiteof our results showing that expertise is valued more highly than the methodology. 5.3. Paradox of data versus authority An interesting and important finding relates to the role of authority during the coaching sessions and in the entrepreneur-coach relation- ships. Contrary to the ideas of the lean startup methodology, the coa- cheswerenotperceivedasneutralfacilitators,guidingentrepreneursin following the instructions. Owing to the design of the accelerator pro- gram—having three phases and oneround of qualificationat the endof the second phase—the coaches were not seen as facilitators of skill development,butratherasauthorityfigureswhoseopinionswereoften valued more highly than the data. This is in stark contrast to the foundation of the lean startup methodology that the data collected through interactions with potential customers have primacy over prior or outdated knowledge and experience (Blank and Dorf, 2012; Ries, 2011).Coaches’expertiseintermsofbusinessdevelopmentshouldonly matter as a way to create a sense of legitimacy. This leads to a para- doxical situation: coaching may be detrimental to the adoption and execution of the lean startup methodology. To overcome this paradox, coaches would benefit from being aware of their style of advising and how they seek to transform entrepreneurs and should be less concerned about their legitimacy and instructive capabilities. Here, they can instead focus on encouraging team mem- bers to speak to one another and engage in learning (Harms, 2015). At the same time, coaches should generate a base-level legitimacy to be
in learning (Harms, 2015). At the same time, coaches should generate a base-level legitimacy to be able to inspire action and elicit trust from entrepreneurs and to con- vince them to adhere to the lean startup methodology. This highlights the importance of early and clear communication by coaches as facil- itators of skill development in the lean startup methodology and of a processofconsultation(Schein,1987).Thismayrequireacleardivisionof labor between those involved in selecting the teams and those actingas coaches. Note that the structure of the accelerator program provides an environment that elevates the importance of coaches as authority figures, thus undermining the validity and significance of the empirical evidence collected by entrepreneurs. 5.4. Vicarious learning as part of the coaching sessions The structure of the coaching sessions created a space for vicarious learning. Because peer learning is an important goal and outcome of coaching sessions, entrepreneurs are enabled to bypass experience by listeningtoother’sexperiences.Inthisway,entrepreneurscandecrease the economic and psychological cost of trial and error while benefiting from second-hand experiences. Vicarious learning, represented by lis- tening and reflective thinking (Nehls, 1995), is largely conditioned by the values individuals associate with the outcome of the modeled ex- periences(GioiaandManz,1985).Someofthemodeledbehaviorswere communicated to them by coaches and others by entrepreneurs. As a faster method than direct experience, these learning episodes create a larger knowledge base among entrepreneurs and affect their inter- personalrelationshipswithotherentrepreneurs.Theintroductionofthe lean startup methodology and its influence on the structure of the coaching sessions had a direct impact on the progression of vicarious learning episodes. A factor that fosters vicarious learning is the acknowledgement that others can provide insights from their own experiences that are per- --- is the acknowledgement that others can provide insights from their own experiences that are per- ceived asapplicabletoindividuals'owncases(Ellisetal.,2004).This is linked directly to the notions of legitimacy and authority and how they are signaled successfully early on or are acquired in a relationship (Cleggetal.,2007).Thesenotionsbecomeespeciallyrelevantwhenthe ideas communicated from a position of authority and legitimacy are treated as truth and, therefore, not subject to scrutiny and interpreta- tion (Harden, 2000). This suggests that building trust and legitimacy rather than authority is important to facilitating vicarious learning in these settings. In other words, there is value in giving prominence to and encouraging interactions between entrepreneurs to cultivate such learning. In line with the vicarious learning taking place as part of the coaching sessions, inspirational seminars can play an important role because they function as legitimizers of the lean startup methodology. In the studied accelerator, most of the speakers explicitly endorsed the lean startup methodology and were viewed by the entrepreneurs as legitimate figures who were well-versed in terms of the methodology’s core ideas. This created a space that helped entrepreneurs to learn vi- cariously from these speakers, whose success they associated with the methodology, encouraging them to act in accordance with the metho- dology’s instructions. 5.5. Implications for theory The lean startup methodology has gained broad acceptance in the startup community in a relatively short period (Fredriksen and Brem, 2017). However, there is a lack of evidence on the effectiveness of the methodology. There is also little knowledge about the role of en- trepreneurial coaching in accelerators driven by the lean startup methodology. The main implications for theory from this study are around the lean startup methodology used in accelerators, namely: 1) its behavior-changing effects, 2) its trust-building
methodology used in accelerators, namely: 1) its behavior-changing effects, 2) its trust-building qualities, 3) its lim- itations, and 4) its potential to open a new conversation into the pragmatic role of entrepreneurial methods in entrepreneurial coaching practices. First, lean startup methodology used by coaches in an accelerator has notable effects both on entrepreneur-coach relationships and on vicarious learning among entrepreneurs. The transformative effects captured in the current study do not stem only from coaching or ac- celerator context alone but also from the introduction of the leanY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 44
not only as tools to organize entrepreneurial activities but also as boundary objects (Koskinen, 2005) facilitating the transition of coaches from authoritarian know-it-alls to enablers of behavioral changes in en- trepreneurs (Parsloe and Leedham, 2009). That is, entrepreneurial methodscanactasvehiclesofchangeinentrepreneurialbehavior,from traditional planning approaches to more experimental and experiential styles. This brings to the forefront the need for more thorough in- vestigation of the role of entrepreneurial methods on entrepreneurialoutcomes (Mansoori, 2018). A question that remains is whether the leanstartupmethodologycanactinsimilarwaysinthedailypracticeof entrepreneurs as in formalized and cohort-based context of accel- erators. 5.6. Implications for practice This study highlights the importance of the role of coaches and the challenges in the design of accelerator programs based on the lean startup methodology. When structuring activities, accelerators have traditionally focusedon a combinationof theories on businessplanning and on the experience of coaches. Coaches’ experience is an important factor in entrepreneur-coachrelationships becausethey are regarded as experts and their experience is considered as instruction for further action. However, including the lean startup methodology introduces challenges into the design of such programs and the role played by coaches. Therefore, it may be necessary to reconsider the role of coa- ches in these programs. Coaches need to consider a process of con- sultationthatisempoweredbyavoidingthepitfallsofexercisingexpert authority (Schein, 1987). A possible way forward may be to regard coaches more as facil- itators of knowledge accumulation and skill development than au- thority figures with extensive experience. Coaches should then limit their authoritative advice to suggestions and options (Hytti and O’Gorman, 2004) and allow entrepreneurs to drive their processes. Therefore, they should aim to formulate
2004) and allow entrepreneurs to drive their processes. Therefore, they should aim to formulate their advice and opinions as hypotheses subject to validation rather than as facts based on past ex- periences. Moreover, there may be benefits in dividing the functions of coaches and organizers. In the studied accelerator program, the fact that the coaches were also the organizers led to some entrepreneurs valuing their coaches’ experience more highly than the data they col- lected from potential customers. This contradicts the basics of the lean startup methodology and creates confusion for entrepreneurs. Thus, there is a need to rethink the design of accelerator programs to provide a space that negates cognitive biases such as anchoring and confirma- tion biases (Kahneman, 2011). 6. Conclusion This study examines the dynamics of entrepreneur-coach relation- ships in a university-based accelerator in Sweden based on the lean startup methodology. The main result is that entrepreneur-coach re- lationshipsaredirectlyimpactedbythe introductionoftheleanstartup methodology because the methodology defines and dictates the struc- tureandcontentofthecoachingsessionsand,thus,providesacommon starting point for discussions. The methodology instills trust, en- courages honest interactions with coaches, and increases participants’ willingness to change their behavior. Thus, it contributes to an evolu- tionary coaching strategy aimed at transforming and developing en- trepreneurs. This finding contrasts with business plan-driven coaching, which tends to be more functional in style. Contrary to the ideas of the lean startup methodology, the coaches were not perceived as neutral facilitators, guiding entrepreneurs in following the methodology. Rather, they were seen as authority figures whose opinions were often valued more highly than the data. The structure of the coaching ses- sionscreatedaspaceforvicariouslearningepisodes.Asafastermethod than direct experience, these episodes
Owner’s Manual: The Step-by-Step Guide for Building a Great Company. K&S Ranch, Incorporated, San Francisco, CA. Bøllingtoft, A., 2012. The bottom-up business incubator: leverage to networking and cooperation practices in a self-generated, entrepreneurial-enabled environment. Technovation 32, 304–315. Britton, J., 2010. Effective Group Coaching: Tried and Tested Tools and Resources for Optimum Coaching results. John Wiley & Sons, Ontario, Canada. Brockbank,A., 2008.Isthecoachingfit forpurpose?Atypologyof coachingandlearning approaches. Coach.: Int. J. Theory, Res. Pract. 1, 132–144. Brockbank, A., McGill, I., 2006. Facilitating Reflective Learning Through Mentoring and Coaching. Kogan Page Publishers, London, United Kingdom. Brown, T., 2008. Design thinking. Harvard Business Review 86, 84–92. Bruneel, J., Ratinho, T., Clarysse, B., Groen, A., 2012. The evolution of business in- cubators: comparing demand and supply of business incubation services across dif- ferent incubator generations. Technovation 32, 110–121. Christiansen, J., 2009. Copying Y Combinator, A Framework for Developing Seed AcceleratorPrograms (MBAdissertation).UniversityofCambridge,UnitedKingdom. Clarysse, B., Bruneel, J., 2007. Nurturing and growing innovative start-ups: the role of policy as integrator. R&D Manag. 37, 139–149. Clegg, S., Rhodes, C., Kornberger, M., 2007. Desperately seeking legitimacy: organiza- tional identity and emerging industries. Organ. Stud. 28, 495–513. Cohen, S., Hochberg, Y., 2014. Accelerating startups: the seed accelerator phenomenon. SSRN Electron. J. 1–16. Cooper,C.,Hamel,S.,Connaughton,S.,2012.Motivationsandobstaclestonetworkingin a university business incubator. J. Technol. Transf. 37, 433–453. Cox, E., 2013. Coaching Understood. SAGE Publications Limited, London, United Kingdom. Cox,E.,Bachkirova,T.,Clutterbuck,D.,2014.Theoreticaltraditionsandcoachinggenres: mapping the territory. Adv. Dev. Hum. Resour. 16, 1–22. Davidsson, P., Honig, B., 2003. The role of social --- Mater. Res. 2, 1–8. Hochberg, Y.V., 2015. Accelerating entrepreneurs and ecosystems: the seed accelerator. Innov. Policy Econ. 16, 25–51. Hytti, U., O’Gorman, C., 2004. What is “enterprise education”? An analysis of the ob- jectives and methods of enterprise education programs in four European Countries.Educ. + Train. 46, 11–23. Jacob, M., Lundqvist, M., Hellsmark, H., 2003. Entrepreneurial transformations in the Swedish university system: the case of Chalmers University of Technology. Res. Policy 32, 1555–1568. Kahneman, D., 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Macmillan, New York, NY. Koskinen, K.U., 2005. Metaphoric boundary objects as coordinating mechanisms in the knowledge sharing of innovation processes. Eur. J. Innov. Manag. 8, 323–335. Kutzhanova, N., Lyons, T.S., Lichtenstein, G.A., 2009. Skill-based development of en- trepreneurs and the role of personal and peer group coaching in enterprise devel-opment. Econ. Dev. Q. 23, 193–210. Ladd,T.,Lyytinen,K.,Gemmell,R.,2015.Howcustomerinteractionandexperimentation advance new venture concepts in a cleantech accelerator. Acad. Manag. Proc. 1–37. Lundqvist, M., 2014. The importance of surrogate entrepreneurship for incubated Swedish technology ventures. Technovation 34, 93–100. Lundqvist, M., Williams-Middleton, K., 2008. Sustainable wealth creation beyond shareholder value. In: Wankel, C., Stoner, J. (Eds.), Innovative Approaches to GlobalSustainability. Palgrave MacMillan, New York, NY, pp. 39–62. Lynn, G., Morone, G., Paulson, A., 1996. Marketing and Discontinuous Innovation: the probe and learn process. Calif. Manag. Rev. 38, 8–38. Mansoori, Y., 2018. Entrepreneurial Methods as Vehicles of Entrepreneurial Action (Doctoral dissertation). Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden. Martinez, M., Yang, T., Aldrich, H., 2011. Entrepreneurship as an evolutionary process: research progress and challenges. Entrep. Res. J. 1 (Article 4). Maurya, A., 2012. Running Lean: Iterate from Plan A to a Plan that Works. --- Res. J. 1 (Article 4). Maurya, A., 2012. Running Lean: Iterate from Plan A to a Plan that Works. O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, CA. McAdam, M., Miller, K., McAdam, R., 2016. Situated regional university incubation: a multi-level stakeholder perspective. Technovation 50, 69–78. McGrath, R., MacMillan, I., 2000. The Entrepreneurial Mindset: strategies for ContinuouslyCreatingOpportunityinanAgeofUncertainty.HarvardBusinessPress,Cambridge, MA. Mian, S., Lamine, W., Fayolle, A., 2016. Technology business incubation: an overview of the state of knowledge. Technovation 50–51, 1–12. Miles, M., Huberman, A., 1984. Drawing valid meaning from qualitative data. Educ. Res. 15, 20–30. Nehls, N., 1995. Narrative pedagogy: rethinking nursing education. J. Nurs. Educ. 34, 204–210. Nonaka, L., Takeuchi, H., Umemoto, K., 1996. A theory of organizational knowledge creation. Int. J. Technol. Manag. 11, 833–845. O’Broin, A., Palmer, S., 2009. Co-creating an optimal coaching alliance: a cognitive be- havioural coaching perspective. Int. Coach. Psychol. Rev. 4, 184–194. Ollila, S., Williams-Middleton, K., 2011. The venture creation approach: integrating en- trepreneurial education and incubation at the university. Int. J. Entrep. Innov. Manag. 13, 161–178. Osterwalder, A.,Pigneur,Y.,Tucci,C.,2005.Clarifyingbusinessmodels:origins,present, and future of the concept. Commun. Assoc. Inform. Syst. 15, 1–38. Parsloe, E., 1999. The Manager as Coach and Mentor, second ed. CIPD Publishing, London, United Kingdom. Parsloe, E., Leedham, M., 2009. Coaching and Mentoring: Practical Conversations to Improve Learning. Kogan Page Publishers, London, UK. Pauwels, C., Clarysse, B., Wright, M., Van Hove, J., 2016. Understanding a new genera- tion incubation model: the accelerator. Technovation 50–51, 13–24. Peterson, D., Millier, J., 2005. The alchemy of coaching: “you’re good, Jennifer, but you could be really good.”. Consult. Psychol. J.: Pract. Res. 57, 14–40. Ragins, B., Cotton, J., Miller, J., 2016.
the territory. Adv. Dev. Hum. Resour. 16, 1–22. Davidsson, P., Honig, B., 2003. The role of social and human capital among nascent entrepreneurs. J. Bus. Ventur. 18, 301–331. Davila, A., Foster, G., Jia, N., 2010. Building sustainable high-growth startup companies: management systems as an accelerator. Calif. Manag. Rev. 52, 79–105. Dybå, T., Dingsøyr, T., 2008. Empirical studies of agile software development: a sys- tematic review. Inform. Softw. Technol. 50, 833–859. Eby, L., Lockwood, A., 2005. Proteges' and mentors' reactions to participating in formal mentoring programs: a qualitative investigation. J. Vocat. Behav. 67, 441–458. Ellis,R.,Calvo,R.,Levy,D.,Tan,K.,2004.Learningthroughdiscussions.High.Educ.Res. Dev. 23, 73–93. Flaherty, J., 2005. Coaching: Evoking Excellence in Others. Butterworth–Heinemann, Oxford, United Kingdom. Fredriksen, D.L., Brem, A., 2017. How do entrepreneurs think they create value? A sci- entific reflection of Eric Ries' lean Startup approach. Int. Entrep. Manag. J. 13, 169–189. Gioia, D., Manz, C., 1985. Linking cognition and behavior: a script processing inter- pretation of vicarious learning. Acad. Manag. Rev. 10, 527–539.Grant, A., 2006. A personal perspective on professional coaching and the development of coaching psychology. Int. Coach. Psychol. Rev. 1, 12–22. Harden,J.,2000.Language,discourseandthechronotope:applyingliterarytheorytothe narratives in health care. J. Adv. Nurs. 31, 506–512. Hargrove, R., 2000. Masterful Coaching Fieldbook. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA. Harms, R., 2015. Self-regulated learning, team learning and project performance in en- trepreneurship education: learning in a lean startup environment. Technol. Forecast. Social. Change 100, 21–28. Harms, R., Marinakis, Y., Walsh, S.T., 2015. The lean startup for materials ventures and other science-based ventures: under what conditions is it useful? Transl. Mater. Res. 2, 1–8. Hochberg, Y.V., 2015. Accelerating entrepreneurs and ecosystems: the seed
good.”. Consult. Psychol. J.: Pract. Res. 57, 14–40. Ragins, B., Cotton, J., Miller, J., 2016. Marginal mentoring: the effects of type of mentor, quality of relationship, and program design on work and career attitudes. Acad. Manag. 43, 1177–1194. Read, S., Sarasvathy, S.D., 2005. Knowing what to do and doing what you know: effec- tuation as a form of entrepreneurial expertise. J. Priv. Equity 9, 45–62. Ries, E., 2011. The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation toCreateRadicallySuccessfulBusinesses.RandomHouseDigital,Inc.,NewYork,NY. Rymer, J., 2002. “Only connect”: transforming ourselves and our discipline through co- mentoring. J. Bus. Commun. 39, 342–363. Schein, E., 1987. Process Consultation: Lessons for Managers and Consultants. Addison- Wesley OD Series, Reading, MA. Soetanto, D., Jack, S., 2016. The impact of university-based incubation support on the innovation strategy of academic spin-offs. Technovation 50, 25–40. Spence, G., Grant, A., 2007. Professional and peer life coaching and the enhancement ofY. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 46 --- goal striving and well-being: an exploratory study. J. Posit. Psychol. 2, 185–194. Strauss, A., Corbin, J., 1998. Basics of Qualitative Research: Procedures and Techniques for Developing Grounded Theory. SAGE Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA. Sue-Chan, C., Latham, G., 2004. The relative effectiveness of external, peer, and self- coaches. Appl. Psychol. 53, 260–278. Sull, D., 2004. Disciplined entrepreneurship. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 46, 71–77. Van Weele, M., Van Rijnsoever, F., Eveleens, C., 2015. Start-EU-up! International in- cubation practices to overcome the main challenges of the Western European en- trepreneurial ecosystem, In: DRUID15 Rome – The Relevance of Innovation. VanWeele,M.,vanRijnsoever,F.J.,Nauta,F.,2017.Youcan'talwaysgetwhatyouwant: How entrepreneur's perceived resource needs affect the incubator's assertiveness.Technovation 59, 18–33. Vaughan, D., 2009. Analytic ethnography. In: The Oxford Handbook of Analytical Sociology, pp. 688–711. Whitmore, J., 1992. Coaching for Performance. Nicholas Brealey, London, United Kingdom. Wise,S.,Valliere,D.,2014.Theimpactonmanagementexperienceontheperformanceof start-ups within accelerators. J. Private Equity 9–19. Wright, M., 2007. Academic Entrepreneurship in Europe. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, United Kingdom. York, J.,Danes,J., 2014.Customerdevelopment, innovation,anddecision-makingbiases in lean startup. J. Small Bus. Strategy 24, 21–39.Y. Mansoori, et al. Technovation 84– 85 (2019) 37–47 47
El artículo titulado "The influence of the lean startup methodology on entrepreneur-coach relationships in the context of a startup accelerator" de Yashar Mansoori, Tomas Karlsson y Mats Lundqvist, publicado en la revista Technovation, examina cómo la metodología de lean startup impacta las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches en un programa de aceleración de startups. Este estudio se basa en un enfoque etnográfico y entrevistas, centrándose en un acelerador universitario en Suecia que adopta esta metodología.

### Resumen Detallado:

**Contexto y Objetivo del Estudio:**
La metodología de lean startup ha ganado popularidad en los últimos años, y los programas de aceleración han comenzado a adoptarla como su marco organizativo principal. A pesar de la importancia del coaching en estos programas, hay una falta de conocimiento sobre cómo interactúan los coaches con la metodología lean startup. Este estudio busca responder a la pregunta de investigación: "¿Cómo influye la incorporación de la metodología lean startup en las dinámicas de las relaciones entre emprendedores y sus coaches en un programa de aceleración?"

**Metodología:**
Se utilizó un diseño de estudio etnográfico que incluyó observaciones no participativas de conferencias, seminarios y sesiones de coaching a lo largo de un programa de aceleración de 15 semanas. Además, se realizaron diez entrevistas con emprendedores y seis con coaches para complementar los datos observacionales.

**Hallazgos:**
Los resultados indican que la metodología lean startup influye en la evolución de las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches, facilitando el aprendizaje entre los emprendedores. Sin embargo, también se identificó un conflicto entre la información obtenida de los clientes y la autoridad percibida de los coaches. A pesar de este conflicto, la metodología permite que el coaching sea evolutivo y cambie supuestos, lo que puede ser beneficioso para el desarrollo de las actividades emprendedoras.

**Contribuciones al Conocimiento:**
El estudio contribuye a la literatura sobre aceleradores, coaching emprendedor y la metodología lean startup de dos maneras:
1. Proporciona una comprensión más profunda del papel de los coaches y las sesiones de coaching, tanto en forma como en contenido.
2. Rastrear las instrucciones de la metodología lean startup a lo largo de las sesiones de coaching para investigar su influencia como marco organizativo.

**Marco de Referencia:**
El artículo establece un marco de referencia que incluye tres componentes principales: la metodología lean startup, el coaching emprendedor y los aceleradores. Se introducen estos elementos para calificar el estudio etnográfico y explorar las interrelaciones entre ellos.

**Conclusiones y Sugerencias:**
El estudio sugiere que, para mitigar los desafíos relacionados con el progreso de las actividades emprendedoras y las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches, es necesario encontrar un equilibrio entre la información del cliente y la autoridad del coach. Esto podría facilitar un entorno de aprendizaje más efectivo y adaptativo dentro de los programas de aceleración.

En resumen, el artículo ofrece una visión detallada de cómo la metodología lean startup impacta las relaciones de coaching en un contexto de aceleración, destacando tanto los beneficios como los desafíos que surgen de esta interacción. El texto aborda el papel de los programas de aceleración en el ecosistema emprendedor, destacando la creciente popularidad de los aceleradores universitarios como componentes clave en el desarrollo regional de emprendimientos. Estos programas, de duración limitada, están diseñados para ayudar a los emprendedores a definir sus ideas y crear prototipos iniciales. Tradicionalmente, los organizadores de estos programas han utilizado enfoques de planificación empresarial como marco organizativo para estructurar la capacitación y los servicios ofrecidos.

Sin embargo, en respuesta a la evolución de las metodologías de negocio, muchos aceleradores han adoptado la metodología de "lean startup", que se centra en el aprendizaje iterativo a partir de la retroalimentación de los clientes potenciales. Aceleradores de renombre como Y Combinator, Techstars, 500 Startups y AngelPad han estructurado sus servicios siguiendo esta metodología. Aunque el coaching no se aborda explícitamente en la metodología "lean startup", el estudio indica que esta metodología influye en la forma en que se comunica el conocimiento dentro de las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches.

El papel de los coaches cambia de ser mentores y vehículos de transferencia de conocimiento, como en la planificación empresarial, a facilitadores de una práctica de prueba de hipótesis, según la metodología "lean startup". Esta nueva metodología ha introducido formas innovadoras de estructurar los servicios de los aceleradores, proporcionando a los emprendedores un marco más organizado para pensar y actuar. Además, permite a los coaches organizar sus actividades de manera diferente, fomentando interacciones más estructuradas entre emprendedores y coaches, así como oportunidades de aprendizaje vicario entre emprendedores.

El estudio también destaca que la confianza es un requisito previo para que los emprendedores aprendan de manera sistemática. La forma en que se construye la confianza es crucial; la confianza generada a través de la metodología "lean startup" difiere de la forma tradicional en que los coaches han ganado confianza, que se basa en la autoridad, el éxito previo y la experiencia personal. Este cambio en la construcción de la confianza resulta en un estilo de coaching más funcional y centrado en la planificación empresarial, mientras que la metodología "lean startup" promueve un estilo de coaching evolutivo que transforma y desarrolla a los emprendedores al desafiar sus supuestos establecidos.

El análisis de las interacciones a nivel micro entre los coaches de aceleradores, sus prácticas y los emprendedores enriquece la comprensión de la relación entre el entorno del acelerador y el rendimiento emprendedor. La introducción de la metodología "lean startup" en los aceleradores puede cambiar la autoridad de los coaches, haciéndolos menos asertivos, lo que permite un estilo de coaching más evolutivo. Sin embargo, esto también plantea un dilema en la teoría del coaching en el contexto de los aceleradores, que debe equilibrar la autoridad, la experiencia y la asertividad con la orientación metodológica.

Finalmente, se mencionan algunas limitaciones en relación con el contexto de uso de la metodología "lean startup", señalando que todos los emprendedores analizados estaban trabajando en ideas que requerían interacción. Esto sugiere que el contexto y la naturaleza de las ideas emprendedoras son factores importantes a considerar al aplicar la metodología. El texto aborda la implementación de la metodología lean startup en el contexto de aceleradoras de negocios, donde se ofrecen conferencias, seminarios y sesiones de coaching. Los coaches utilizan la estructura de esta metodología para organizar sus sesiones, que se centran en temas clave como la interacción con los clientes, la validación de hipótesis y el análisis de datos recopilados. Estos elementos son fundamentales en las instrucciones de la metodología lean startup y se integran en las prácticas de coaching, influyendo en la regularidad o irregularidad de estas prácticas.

A pesar de la creciente presencia de aceleradoras y la relevancia del papel de los coaches, se observa que hay una escasez de estudios que analicen en profundidad la relación entre emprendedores y coaches. La mayoría de los estudios que mencionan el coaching se limitan a reconocer la existencia de este rol, sin profundizar en su impacto o en la dinámica de la relación entre ambos.

El texto también incluye información sobre la recepción y publicación del artículo, indicando que fue recibido el 17 de marzo de 2017, revisado el 22 de febrero de 2019 y aceptado el 7 de marzo de 2019. Se menciona que el artículo está disponible en línea bajo una licencia de acceso abierto. El texto aborda la metodología del "lean startup", destacando su relación con otras contribuciones en el ámbito del emprendimiento, como "disciplined entrepreneurship", "discovery-driven planning" y "probe and learn". Esta metodología se apoya en herramientas de diversas teorías y métodos, incluyendo el marco de desarrollo del cliente, la creación rápida de prototipos y principios de desarrollo ágil de software. Un aspecto central del "lean startup" es el aprendizaje validado a través de experimentación intencionada, aplicando principios de flexibilidad y pérdida asequible.

La metodología se caracteriza por un lenguaje, estructura y consejos estrictos, lo que la convierte en un "objeto de frontera metafórico" que permite a los usuarios demostrar su experiencia. El aprendizaje validado se enfoca en el progreso mediante la prueba de suposiciones formuladas y el análisis de datos empíricos obtenidos de clientes reales. El proceso del "lean startup" se basa en tres conjuntos principales de actividades:

1. **Descomposición de ideas**: Los emprendedores descomponen sus ideas de negocio en suposiciones testables y las mapean en un lienzo de modelo de negocio, que incluye todos los aspectos clave que deben ser relativamente seguros.

2. **Pruebas de suposiciones**: Los emprendedores participan en un proceso para probar estas suposiciones en relación con sus ideas de negocio. La secuencia de pruebas se determina por la criticidad percibida de los resultados para la continuidad del proceso. Una forma de probar las suposiciones es a través de un "producto mínimo viable" (MVP), que es una versión del producto con el conjunto más pequeño de características, construido con el mínimo de tiempo y recursos.

El texto también menciona que todos los emprendedores analizados estaban trabajando en ideas donde la interacción con los clientes era clave, lo que se alinea con la metodología "lean startup" que considera al cliente como la principal autoridad. Sin embargo, se sugiere que las empresas con niveles más bajos de preparación tecnológica podrían beneficiarse de métodos diferentes.

Además, se plantea que los coaches en aceleradoras más especializadas podrían desempeñar un papel más importante en ofrecer redes para sus clientes, en lugar de esperar que los emprendedores asuman todas las actividades de creación de redes. A pesar de esto, los métodos prescriptivos de emprendimiento, como el "lean startup", pueden transformar la relación entre emprendedores y coaches de funcionalista a evolutiva.

El texto también sugiere que los métodos de emprendimiento pueden ser vehículos para convertir a los coaches en agentes de modificaciones de comportamiento, en lugar de ser solo portadores de conocimiento dependiente del contexto. Se destaca que el comportamiento de cambio de suposiciones de los emprendedores por parte de los coaches no ha sido anticipado en la investigación ni en la metodología misma.

Finalmente, se concluye que la investigación sobre coaching emprendedor, aceleradoras y el emprendimiento en general se beneficiaría de una mayor investigación sobre métodos emprendedores aplicados, así como de la mejora y creación de nuevos métodos que no solo iluminen el camino para los emprendedores, sino que también enriquezcan las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches, beneficiando así a las aceleradoras de startups. Este estudio abre una nueva conversación sobre el papel pragmático de los métodos emprendedores en la comprensión de la dinámica del coaching emprendedor, viéndolos no solo como herramientas para organizar actividades emprendedoras, sino también como objetos de frontera. El texto aborda dos conceptos clave en el ámbito del emprendimiento: la metodología Lean Startup y el coaching empresarial. 

**Metodología Lean Startup:**
La metodología Lean Startup, según Ries (2011), se centra en el desarrollo de productos utilizando la menor cantidad de tiempo y recursos posibles. Su objetivo principal es proporcionar a los emprendedores la información necesaria para validar o invalidar sus suposiciones sobre el mercado y el producto. Este proceso implica una evaluación rigurosa de los resultados obtenidos de las pruebas iniciales. Cuando una suposición es invalidada, se reemplaza por una nueva que se vuelve a probar. Este ciclo de prueba y error continúa hasta que se valida un número razonable de suposiciones críticas. Al final del proceso, los emprendedores toman decisiones sobre las suposiciones restantes basándose en sus interacciones con clientes potenciales.

Un concepto fundamental dentro de esta metodología es el "ajuste producto-mercado" (product-market fit), que se refiere a la existencia de un mercado para la idea del producto, lo que implica que hay clientes dispuestos a pagar por el valor que ofrece el producto (Blank y Dorf, 2012). El objetivo final de la metodología es guiar a los emprendedores en la identificación de este ajuste.

**Coaching Empresarial:**
El coaching empresarial se define de diversas maneras. Hargrove (2000) lo describe como todas las actividades destinadas a potenciar el potencial de los individuos. Aas y Vavik (2015) lo ven como intervenciones deliberadas para ayudar a las personas a desarrollar y alcanzar sus objetivos. Parsloe (1999) lo define como un proceso estructurado de desarrollo de habilidades a través de la evaluación, la experiencia práctica guiada y la retroalimentación regular. Whitmore (1992) lo considera un conjunto de prácticas para facilitar el aprendizaje.

El coaching se sugiere como una medida de apoyo (Audet y Couteret, 2012), un marco estructurado para guiar la comunicación (Spence y Grant, 2007), una herramienta para organizar el aprendizaje entre pares (Kutzhanova et al., 2009), y un medio para fomentar un sentido de pertenencia a un grupo más amplio (Kutzhanova et al., 2009). Además, se destaca su importancia como un incentivo para la acción (Cooper et al., 2012; Flaherty, 2005).

En el contexto de este estudio, el coaching empresarial se define como el apoyo que reciben los emprendedores en las etapas iniciales de sus actividades para ayudarles a desarrollarse. Se menciona que, más allá de la experiencia directa, estas interacciones contribuyen a una base de conocimiento más amplia entre los emprendedores y afectan sus relaciones interpersonales.

El texto también sugiere que futuras investigaciones deberían explorar cómo el estilo de coaching y la organización de los aceleradores pueden influir en la dinámica entre los coaches y los emprendedores, especialmente en relación con la autoridad de los coaches, que podría obstaculizar los esfuerzos de generación y prueba de hipótesis de los emprendedores. Además, se plantea la necesidad de investigar la legitimidad de la metodología Lean Startup en función de las características de las empresas que están siendo aceleradas, especialmente aquellas con niveles más bajos de preparación tecnológica y otras características que afectan la heterogeneidad de los emprendimientos. El texto aborda la importancia del coaching en las etapas iniciales de las actividades emprendedoras, destacando que su objetivo principal es facilitar el aprendizaje y el desarrollo de habilidades necesarias para resolver problemas que surgen en el proceso de emprendimiento. Según Audet y Couteret (2012), el coaching se presenta como una herramienta esencial en programas de aceleración de startups, donde los emprendedores a menudo carecen de conocimientos, habilidades y experiencia.

El coaching no se centra únicamente en resolver problemas específicos, sino que crea un contexto que permite a los emprendedores desarrollar las competencias necesarias para enfrentar desafíos. La relación entre el coach y el emprendedor no depende exclusivamente de la experiencia previa del coach en startups, sino que está influenciada por varios factores, como la igualdad de poder en la relación, la promoción de una cultura de aprendizaje colaborativo, la efectividad de la comunicación y las herramientas utilizadas para facilitar el desarrollo (Cox et al., 2014; Schein, 1987).

Para fomentar la apertura y la confianza en la relación de coaching, se sugiere evitar jerarquías, considerando al coach como un facilitador del aprendizaje (O’Broin y Palmer, 2009; Schein, 1987). La comunicación efectiva se logra a través de prácticas como la escucha activa, la clarificación, el fomento de la reflexión crítica y el cuestionamiento, que son fundamentales para el aprendizaje colaborativo (Cox et al., 2014).

El texto también menciona que las relaciones de coaching pueden clasificarse en tres arquetipos, aunque no se detallan en el fragmento. La confianza es un elemento crucial que permite a los emprendedores reconocer sus limitaciones y la necesidad de adquirir nuevos conocimientos, lo que fortalece la relación con sus coaches (Kutzhanova et al., 2009). La disposición de los emprendedores para comprometerse y cambiar su comportamiento es vital para la calidad de la interacción con sus coaches (Audet y Couteret, 2012; Peterson y Millier, 2005).

La confianza sostenida entre emprendedores y coaches aumenta la probabilidad de que los emprendedores adopten las estructuras propuestas por los coaches. En el contexto del programa de aceleración estudiado, los coaches implementaron la metodología de lean startup, que proporciona modelos mentales compartidos y fomenta interacciones significativas. Esta metodología, alienta la flexibilidad y la apertura al cambio, creando un entorno propicio para que los emprendedores modifiquen su comportamiento y adopten nuevas herramientas.

El enfoque descrito se asemeja a una estrategia de coaching evolutivo, que busca transformar y desarrollar a los emprendedores al desafiar sus supuestos establecidos (Brockbank y McGill, 2006), en contraste con un coaching más funcional basado en planes de negocio. Además, se sugiere que la experiencia de los coaches impacta directamente en los resultados de sus actividades de coaching (Spence y Grant, 2007; Sue-Chan y Latham, 2004). La defensa de la metodología lean startup por parte de los coaches contribuye a su percepción de experiencia y legitimidad ante los emprendedores. El texto analiza las relaciones de coaching empresarial, clasificándolas en tres arquetipos: funcionalista, de compromiso y evolutiva. 

1. **Coaching Funcionalista**: 
   - **Objetivo**: Lograr cambios incrementales en las rutinas y actividades de los emprendedores, sin alterar significativamente sus normas y valores existentes.
   - **Características**: Este enfoque es directivo, didáctico y se basa en la entrega de consejos. 
   - **Resultado de Aprendizaje**: Se produce un aprendizaje de bucle simple, donde se realizan ajustes sin cuestionar las premisas subyacentes.
   - **Crítica**: Se considera que este enfoque ve al emprendedor como "desapegado, desincorporado y pasivo", lo que limita su participación activa en el proceso de aprendizaje.

2. **Coaching de Compromiso**: 
   - **Objetivo**: Similar al funcionalista, busca mejoras incrementales en las rutinas, pero lo hace de manera no directiva.
   - **Características**: El coach adopta un enfoque humanista y centrado en la relación, lo que ayuda a minimizar la resistencia de los emprendedores.
   - **Resultado de Aprendizaje**: También se produce un aprendizaje de bucle simple, pero con la posibilidad de reflexión, lo que permite un mayor enfoque en el aprendizaje y el cambio.

3. **Coaching Evolutivo**: 
   - **Objetivo**: Busca un desarrollo transformacional mediante cambios fundamentales en las suposiciones que los emprendedores tienen.
   - **Características**: Al igual que el coaching de compromiso, el coach evolutivo utiliza un enfoque humanista y centrado en la relación, pero se enfoca en promover un aprendizaje más profundo.
   - **Resultado de Aprendizaje**: Se produce un aprendizaje de bucle doble, que fomenta el desarrollo personal y profesional de los emprendedores, permitiéndoles mejorar sus normas y valores existentes.
   - **Distinción Principal**: Este tipo de coaching facilita un "diálogo reflexivo" con los emprendedores, lo que les permite tomar posesión de su propio aprendizaje y desarrollo.

El contexto del estudio se centra en los **aceleradores de startups**, que son considerados una evolución de los incubadores. Estos aceleradores ofrecen una gama más amplia de servicios que los tradicionales, apoyando el crecimiento y desarrollo de nuevas empresas en un entorno dinámico. El texto aborda la diferencia entre incubadoras y aceleradoras de negocios, destacando que las aceleradoras ofrecen una gama más amplia de servicios a empresas en etapas tempranas. A diferencia de las incubadoras, las aceleradoras son programas de duración fija y basados en cohortes que incluyen elementos educativos e inspiradores, además de coaching, y culminan en un evento público de presentación o "demo day" ante potenciales inversores. Se menciona a Y Combinator, establecido en 2005 en Estados Unidos, como uno de los primeros ejemplos de aceleradoras, que ha servido de inspiración para muchas otras.

Los programas de aceleración proporcionan a los emprendedores un espacio de trabajo, oportunidades educativas y de coaching, así como acceso a una red de exalumnos, coaches y organizadores, que incluye capitalistas de riesgo, emprendedores experimentados y ejecutivos corporativos. Este entorno de apoyo fomenta el aprendizaje y el apoyo entre pares, creando oportunidades para el networking y las referencias. La afiliación a una aceleradora ayuda a construir la marca del emprendedor y actúa como una herramienta de legitimación, facilitando el establecimiento de contactos y la obtención de fondos necesarios.

Un aspecto clave que diferencia a las aceleradoras de las incubadoras es el papel de los coaches, quienes aportan un valor añadido significativo. Sin embargo, a pesar del creciente interés en las aceleradoras por parte de responsables de políticas, inversores privados y públicos, universidades y corporaciones, se conoce poco sobre el papel de los coaches y su metodología de coaching en este contexto.

El estudio mencionado se basa en datos recopilados de una aceleradora asociada a Chalmers Ventures, la subsidiaria de incubación y financiamiento inicial de la Universidad de Tecnología de Chalmers en Suecia. Esta universidad es reconocida por su enfoque en la creación de empresas y su carácter emprendedor, lo que la convierte en un entorno propicio para el desarrollo de iniciativas empresariales. El texto describe un programa de aceleración empresarial que tiene una duración de 15 semanas y está diseñado para ayudar a equipos emprendedores a desarrollar sus ideas de negocio o a preparar sus empresas existentes para el crecimiento y la inversión. Este programa, que admite hasta 20 equipos por cohorte, ofrece acceso a una red de contactos, coaching, y recursos educativos, y se asemeja en estructura al conocido programa Y Combinator, aunque con una competencia menor para la admisión, lo que resulta en que los proyectos participantes suelen ser más jóvenes.

Los emprendedores que desean unirse al programa aplican en las primeras etapas del desarrollo de sus ideas y son organizados en grupos con coaches asignados. Estos coaches son profesionales exitosos que pueden incluir emprendedores, exalumnos del programa, capitalistas de riesgo, abogados, inversores ángeles y ejecutivos corporativos. Además, el programa incluye una serie de conferencias educativas que abordan diversos temas relacionados con la metodología de "lean startup".

El programa se divide en tres fases, cada una de cinco semanas. Después de la segunda fase, se lleva a cabo un proceso de selección en el que casi la mitad de los equipos son eliminados. Los equipos que continúan avanzan a la tercera fase, donde presentan sus ideas en un evento final conocido como "demo day", donde reciben retroalimentación y responden preguntas de inversores y del público.

En cuanto a los métodos de investigación utilizados en el estudio, se argumenta que la combinación de etnografía, entrevistas y otros métodos de recolección de datos puede ofrecer explicaciones basadas en mecanismos y descripciones ricas que conectan diferentes niveles de análisis. La etnografía se define como una forma de investigación que puede proporcionar una comprensión profunda de las dinámicas dentro del programa de aceleración. Se sugiere que futuras investigaciones podrían explorar la relación entre la novatez y la senioridad en el coaching, así como la importancia del aprendizaje en equipo y el aprendizaje entre pares dentro del acelerador. También se menciona que el aprendizaje vicario y experiencial podría verse influenciado por la metodología de "lean startup" y otros métodos emprendedores.

El texto concluye con una lista de referencias que incluye estudios y libros relevantes en el campo del emprendimiento y el coaching empresarial. El texto aborda el uso de la etnografía como método de investigación en el contexto de un programa de aceleración de startups, destacando su capacidad para conectar diferentes niveles de análisis. Según Vaughan (2009), la etnografía implica situarse en un entorno social para observar y analizar interacciones individuales con el fin de comprender procesos sociales complejos. Los etnógrafos se sumergen en el entorno de investigación sin directrices claras sobre cómo se desarrollará el proceso.

Aldrich y Baker (1997) señalan la escasez de investigaciones etnográficas en el ámbito del emprendimiento, una opinión que también comparten Martinez et al. (2011). Este estudio utiliza la etnografía para investigar las acciones e interacciones sociales dentro de un programa de aceleración de startups, basándose en datos etnográficos que incluyen observaciones no participantes, entrevistas y datos secundarios. Esto permite generar una comprensión empírica de las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches.

En cuanto a la muestra, inicialmente se incluyeron 17 equipos emprendedores y 41 emprendedores, todos compuestos por al menos dos miembros. Se fomentó la participación en todas las actividades programadas, y la muestra abarcó una diversidad de participantes en términos de edad, género, educación y experiencia. El programa de aceleración se dividió en tres fases, y al final de la segunda fase, se seleccionaron 10 equipos para avanzar a la tercera fase, limitando así la muestra para entrevistas y un examen más detallado de sus procesos.

La recolección de datos se llevó a cabo a través de investigación de campo etnográfica durante la primavera y el verano de 2016. Esto incluyó observaciones no participantes, entrevistas semiestructuradas en profundidad, cuestionarios cualitativos semanales, interacciones en un canal público de Slack y notas de campo tomadas durante sesiones de coaching, conferencias y seminarios. Durante las 15 semanas del programa, el autor principal estuvo presente en casi todas las actividades, grabando conferencias y sesiones de coaching. Se realizaron entrevistas con los emprendedores líderes de los 10 equipos que avanzaron a la tercera fase y con seis coaches, con una duración promedio de 80 minutos cada una.

Los cuestionarios cualitativos se enviaron semanalmente, solicitando a los emprendedores información sobre las actividades realizadas, su aprendizaje y planes futuros. Además, se monitorearon y codificaron las interacciones públicas en el canal de Slack del programa.

Para el análisis de datos, se utilizó una metodología inductiva basada en principios de la metodología fundamentada, aplicando codificación y categorización del lenguaje natural. Todos los datos empíricos se importaron a una aplicación de análisis de datos cualitativos (Atlas.ti) y se codificaron abiertamente a nivel de las unidades de significado más pequeñas. Los códigos abarcan una amplia gama de temas, incluyendo la inclusión del enfoque de lean startup. El texto presenta un análisis de un programa de coaching para emprendedores, donde se agrupan a los participantes en un solo conjunto para simplificar la evaluación de los datos recolectados. Se menciona que las declaraciones de los emprendedores de un grupo específico, denominado Startup 1, se identifican como S1. Para proporcionar un contexto más detallado, se incluyen tablas que ofrecen información adicional sobre los emprendedores y los coaches involucrados en el programa.

Se recopilaron datos a través de tres conjuntos de cuestionarios semanales en línea, que generaron un total de 471 puntos de datos, además de notas del investigador, observaciones no participantes, 65 páginas de registros y grabaciones de 27 sesiones de coaching grupal que suman 20 horas de contenido. 

El análisis revela varios temas y categorías emergentes en relación con el coaching. Estos se dividen en tres áreas principales:

1. **Forma de Coaching**: 
   - Se exploran las dinámicas entre el emprendedor y el coach, destacando la metodología de lean startup y la autoridad del coach. 
   - Se discuten las expectativas de los coaches hacia los emprendedores, la importancia de la legitimidad del coach y cómo su conocimiento sobre la metodología genera credibilidad.
   - Se menciona la importancia de construir confianza a través de la metodología, que exige a los emprendedores compartir sus progresos y problemas.

2. **Contenido del Coaching**: 
   - Se analizan los cambios en las actividades y mentalidades de los emprendedores como resultado de las sesiones de coaching.
   - Se observa un aumento en la autoconfianza y la autoeficacia de los emprendedores, facilitado por un enfoque sistemático para validar ideas.
   - Se destaca la apertura a la flexibilidad y cómo el coaching grupal contribuye a la autoconfianza, así como a un cambio en la percepción sobre las dificultades de iniciar un nuevo negocio.

3. **Contexto del Coaching**: 
   - Se abordan los aspectos sociales de las sesiones de coaching, tanto en las interacciones con los coaches como entre los emprendedores.
   - Se identifican oportunidades para el aprendizaje entre pares, la competencia y el progreso, así como la presión entre pares que puede motivar a los emprendedores a actuar.
   - Los coaches fomentan la discusión y la participación, y los emprendedores comparten contactos y ofrecen ayuda, lo que crea un ambiente colaborativo.

En resumen, el análisis del programa de coaching revela cómo la metodología lean startup, la dinámica de poder entre coaches y emprendedores, y el contexto social de las sesiones influyen en el desarrollo y la confianza de los emprendedores en su camino hacia el éxito empresarial. El texto aborda un estudio sobre la relación entre emprendedores y coaches dentro de un programa de aceleración que incorpora la metodología de lean startup. Se presenta un análisis detallado de los códigos y categorías que emergen de los datos recopilados, centrándose en temas relevantes como la inclusión de la metodología lean startup, la autoridad de los coaches, la legitimidad que otorgan las sesiones de coaching, el desarrollo mental de los emprendedores y el contexto social en el que se desarrollan las habilidades necesarias.

La organización de los datos se basa en la relación entre emprendedores y coaches, excluyendo categorías que no se alinean con el propósito del estudio, como la falta de instrucciones sobre herramientas y tácticas, ya que esto se relaciona más con el diseño del programa que con las interacciones entre emprendedores y coaches. Esta estructura permite una narrativa rica y concisa de los eventos observados.

En la sección de hallazgos, que se organiza en tres subsecciones correspondientes a temas más amplios, se discuten los efectos de la metodología lean startup en las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches. Cada tema se ilustra con citas de emprendedores y coaches, centrándose en tres aspectos: la forma del coaching, el contenido del coaching y el contexto del coaching.

El primer tema, "forma del coaching", se refiere a los elementos del programa de aceleración que afectan la estructura de las sesiones de coaching. Se exploran las dinámicas de la relación entre emprendedores y coaches, destacando la importancia de las instrucciones derivadas de la metodología lean startup. Las interacciones se producen a través de sesiones de coaching individuales y grupales, así como en conferencias educativas, lo que enriquece la experiencia de aprendizaje y desarrollo para los emprendedores. 

En resumen, el texto proporciona un análisis exhaustivo de cómo la metodología lean startup influye en las relaciones de coaching, destacando la importancia de la estructura y el contexto de las sesiones de coaching en el desarrollo de habilidades y legitimidad en el ámbito emprendedor. El texto describe un enfoque estructurado para las sesiones de coaching dirigidas a emprendedores, influenciado por la metodología de lean startup. A través de sesiones individuales y grupales, así como de conferencias educativas, los coaches establecieron una agenda común que requería a los emprendedores preparar actualizaciones sobre sus interacciones externas, actividades pasadas relacionadas con la validación de hipótesis y planes futuros, junto con los aprendizajes obtenidos. Este enfoque no solo ayudó a los emprendedores a ser conscientes de las expectativas de los coaches, sino que también facilitó su progreso.

Los coaches tenían varios objetivos al seguir esta agenda: proporcionar dirección y confianza, desarrollar nuevas formas de pensar y habilidades necesarias, inducir presión entre pares para aumentar el compromiso, fomentar el intercambio de experiencias y cultivar un sentido de pertenencia. Un coach explicó que el proceso de establecer la agenda implicaba discutir varios temas y finalmente decidir seguir la metodología lean startup en todas las actividades.

Todos los coaches afirmaron que aplicaron explícitamente los principios de la metodología lean startup en sus sesiones de coaching y en sus relaciones con los equipos. Se destacó que esta metodología y herramientas como el business model canvas ayudaron a estructurar la información y a identificar vacíos en el conocimiento, lo que permitió abordar incertidumbres y comprender mejor diversas situaciones.

Un aspecto clave de las sesiones de coaching fue motivar a los emprendedores a seguir la metodología lean startup, reportar los conocimientos adquiridos a través de interacciones con clientes y aprovechar la naturaleza social de las sesiones. Los coaches alentaron a los emprendedores a salir de sus entornos y realizar entrevistas, solicitando evidencia sólida y las implicaciones de la información recopilada.

Los coaches también instaron a los emprendedores a "elevar el nivel" al aumentar la cantidad de interacciones en las semanas siguientes. La metodología lean startup enriqueció las interacciones sociales durante las sesiones de coaching, promoviendo la idea de que los emprendedores eran parte de un "cerebro colectivo", lo que les permitió apoyarse mutuamente.

Las interacciones entre emprendedores fueron influenciadas por las instrucciones de la metodología lean startup, lo que llevó a un intercambio activo de experiencias y retroalimentación. Los emprendedores dedicaron tiempo a trabajar juntos en la planificación de actividades y a ofrecerse consejos e inspiración. Un coach observó que cuando un emprendedor abordaba un tema, los demás estaban interesados en conocer cómo habían manejado situaciones similares, lo que fomentaba un ambiente de aprendizaje colaborativo. En resumen, las sesiones de coaching se caracterizaron por un enfoque estructurado y colaborativo, centrado en la metodología lean startup, que promovió el aprendizaje y el apoyo mutuo entre emprendedores. El texto aborda la influencia de la metodología lean startup en las dinámicas de coaching entre emprendedores y coaches. Se destaca que la inclusión de esta metodología no solo proporcionó una estructura clara, sino que también otorgó legitimidad a la experiencia de los coaches, lo que facilitó la construcción de confianza durante las sesiones de coaching. Esta confianza, a su vez, tuvo un impacto positivo en las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches.

Se presenta una tabla que resume las características de varios emprendedores y sus equipos, incluyendo detalles sobre sus ideas, prototipos previos al programa, conocimiento previo de la metodología lean startup (LSM), cambios significativos realizados y el estado de sus prototipos al final del programa. 

Los emprendedores se clasifican de la siguiente manera:

1. **S1**: Desarrolló un diagnóstico en línea de infecciones del tracto urinario, sin prototipo previo ni conocimiento de LSM, y completó su prototipo.
2. **S2**: Trabajó en una plataforma de registro de propiedades, sin prototipo previo ni conocimiento de LSM, pero no completó su prototipo.
3. **S3**: Creó una plataforma de investigación de mercado, con un prototipo previo y familiaridad limitada con LSM, y completó su prototipo.
4. **S4**: Desarrolló una herramienta de emparejamiento para el mercado de subarrendamientos, sin prototipo previo pero con cursos anteriores, y no completó su prototipo.
5. **S5**: Trabajó en un servicio de reclutamiento digital, sin prototipo previo y familiaridad limitada con LSM, y no completó su prototipo.
6. **S6**: Creó una aplicación de optimización del sueño, sin prototipo previo ni conocimiento de LSM, y completó su prototipo.
7. **S7**: Desarrolló una tienda ecológica en línea, con familiaridad limitada con LSM, y completó su prototipo.
8. **S8**: Trabajó en una aplicación para jardineros, con un prototipo previo y familiaridad limitada con LSM, y completó su prototipo.
9. **S9**: Desarrolló un textil inteligente para trabajadores de la carretera, sin prototipo previo pero con conocimiento de LSM, y completó su prototipo.
10. **S10**: Creó una aplicación para la diabetes, sin prototipo previo pero con conocimiento de LSM, y no completó su prototipo.

El texto concluye enfatizando la importancia de la metodología lean startup en la mejora de las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches, así como en el desarrollo de sus proyectos. El texto aborda la percepción de los entrenadores (coaches) en el contexto de la metodología lean startup, destacando su autoridad y la confianza que los emprendedores depositan en ellos. Se menciona que los emprendedores valoran la experiencia de sus coaches, quienes poseen un conocimiento acumulado a través de años de lectura, interacciones y experiencias prácticas. Esta percepción de legitimidad se traduce en una mayor disposición de los emprendedores a aceptar las instrucciones de sus coaches, especialmente cuando se trata de resolver conflictos internos dentro de los equipos. Por ejemplo, un emprendedor señala que al confrontar a sus compañeros de equipo con lo que el coach había dicho, estos eran más propensos a aceptar su punto de vista, dado el respeto que tenían por la experiencia del coach en la metodología lean startup.

Además, se identifican varios factores que contribuyen a que los coaches sean vistos como figuras de autoridad. Estos incluyen la imposición de demandas a los emprendedores para que estructuren sus actividades de acuerdo con la metodología lean startup y un proceso de filtrado que ocurre después de la segunda fase del programa. Un emprendedor ilustra esta dinámica al afirmar que, si recibe críticas sobre su idea de varias personas pero su coach le aconseja lo contrario, él opta por seguir el consejo del coach.

Sin embargo, uno de los coaches expresa su preocupación por la confianza excesiva que los emprendedores depositan en ellos, señalando que esta puede llevar a decisiones poco fundamentadas. Por ejemplo, si el coach sugiere una dirección y el cliente sugiere otra, los emprendedores tienden a seguir la dirección del coach, lo que indica una expectativa poco realista sobre su autoridad.

Finalmente, el texto menciona que las instrucciones de la metodología lean startup no solo proporcionan estructura y dirección a las sesiones de coaching, sino que también influyen en el pensamiento y las acciones de los emprendedores, lo que resalta la importancia del contenido del coaching en el desarrollo de sus proyectos. El texto aborda dos temas principales relacionados con la metodología de lean startup y su impacto en las sesiones de coaching para emprendedores. 

**Tema 1: Efectos de la metodología lean startup en el contenido del conocimiento durante las sesiones de coaching**

La metodología lean startup, como marco organizativo, tuvo efectos tanto implícitos como explícitos en las actividades de los emprendedores. Durante las sesiones de coaching, se les pidió a los emprendedores que mapearan sus suposiciones sobre sus ideas de negocio utilizando el lienzo del modelo de negocio. Esto implicaba documentar hipótesis críticas sobre sus clientes objetivo y comenzar a interactuar con ellos para validar si el problema que intentaban resolver realmente existía. Un emprendedor destacó que los coaches los instaron a hablar con tantos clientes como fuera posible y a reportar las percepciones obtenidas de esas interacciones. Esta presión competitiva entre los equipos fomentó un mayor esfuerzo por parte de los miembros para contactar a un número aún mayor de personas.

Las nuevas actividades introducidas en las sesiones de coaching llevaron a la creación de rutinas y procesos innovadores. Los emprendedores comenzaron a basar cada decisión en el conocimiento adquirido de fuentes validadas, principalmente de clientes y usuarios. Esto resultó en un cambio en la mentalidad de los emprendedores, quienes empezaron a considerar que era esencial discutir sus ideas con otros, especialmente con los clientes, y evaluar cuidadosamente el feedback recibido. En consecuencia, se produjo una transformación en la forma en que los emprendedores percibían el proceso de creación de empresas, adoptando un enfoque más razonable y racional.

**Tema 2: Contexto de coaching y su influencia en el aprendizaje y la motivación**

El segundo tema se centra en el contexto de las sesiones de coaching y cómo este, combinado con las instrucciones de la metodología lean startup, influyó en las interacciones entre emprendedores y coaches, así como entre los propios emprendedores. Un emprendedor compartió que las sesiones de coaching le ofrecieron nuevas perspectivas que antes había pasado por alto. A pesar de que creían haber confirmado algunas de sus suposiciones, los coaches les proporcionaron ángulos de percepción que los llevaron a reconsiderar y, en muchos casos, a cambiar completamente su dirección.

Además, se presenta una tabla que detalla la experiencia de los coaches en el programa de aceleración, incluyendo su formación, conocimiento sobre la metodología lean startup y la experiencia en coaching. Esta información resalta la diversidad de antecedentes y enfoques de los coaches, lo que contribuye a la riqueza del proceso de aprendizaje en las sesiones de coaching.

En resumen, la metodología lean startup y el contexto de las sesiones de coaching no solo proporcionaron un marco estructurado para el desarrollo de ideas de negocio, sino que también fomentaron un ambiente de aprendizaje colaborativo que impulsó la acumulación de conocimiento, la motivación y la confianza entre los emprendedores. El texto analiza el impacto de la metodología lean startup en las relaciones entre emprendedores y sus coaches dentro de un programa de aceleración. Se destaca que las sesiones de coaching no solo proporcionaron dirección y confianza a los emprendedores, sino que también fomentaron un ambiente que mejoró su autoconfianza y autoeficacia. A través de estas sesiones, los emprendedores pudieron discutir sus logros, compartir experiencias, recibir reconocimiento y ayudar a otros, lo que les permitió desarrollar un sentido de competencia y pertenencia.

A pesar de no haber logrado ejecutar completamente sus ideas o crear prototipos, algunos emprendedores expresaron un aumento en su confianza para explorar nuevas ideas. Uno de ellos mencionó que, aunque su idea inicial no tuvo éxito, se sentía más cómodo persiguiendo nuevas oportunidades gracias a la experiencia adquirida durante las interacciones con los coaches. Otro emprendedor destacó que el programa de aceleración le proporcionó un proceso claro para iniciar un nuevo negocio, lo que le hizo sentir que tenía una mejor comprensión del proceso emprendedor.

El acceso a nuevas metodologías y enfoques fue fundamental para mejorar la autoeficacia de los emprendedores. Muchos reportaron que la instrucción sobre la metodología lean startup aumentó sus posibilidades de éxito, tanto durante como después del programa. Un emprendedor incluso mencionó que se sentía más seguro al investigar diferentes ideas, gracias a lo aprendido sobre la metodología.

Además, el texto menciona que la dinámica de las sesiones de coaching se asemejaba más a una estructura tradicional de líder-seguidor, a pesar de que la metodología lean startup promueve la validación de hipótesis a través de datos empíricos y la interacción con clientes potenciales. Sin embargo, los coaches lograron establecer relaciones de confianza y competencia que facilitaron el desarrollo de habilidades necesarias en los emprendedores. También se observó que las sesiones de coaching ofrecieron oportunidades para el aprendizaje social y entre pares, lo que influyó en la estructura y organización de las sesiones.

Finalmente, se destaca que los emprendedores se beneficiaron de un entorno competitivo, lo que contribuyó a su progreso. En resumen, el estudio revela que la metodología lean startup no solo guía el proceso emprendedor, sino que también transforma las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches, fomentando un ambiente de aprendizaje, confianza y competencia que potencia el desarrollo de nuevas ideas y habilidades empresariales. El texto describe un análisis detallado de las sesiones de coaching dirigidas a emprendedores, destacando cómo estas sesiones fomentan el aprendizaje, la colaboración y la competencia entre los participantes. A continuación, se presenta un resumen extremadamente detallado de los puntos clave:

1. **Naturaleza de las Sesiones de Coaching**: Las sesiones de coaching son vistas como episodios de aprendizaje y desarrollo, donde los emprendedores no solo adquieren conocimientos, sino que también establecen vínculos significativos entre ellos. Un coach menciona que las diferencias de opinión entre emprendedores durante las sesiones pueden desencadenar reflexiones y aprendizajes mutuos, lo que fortalece las relaciones y fomenta la amistad.

2. **Aprendizaje entre Pares**: La estructura grupal de las sesiones permite un ambiente propicio para el aprendizaje entre pares. Los coaches crean un entorno competitivo que estimula la interacción y el intercambio de experiencias. Los emprendedores comparten aprendizajes derivados de experiencias ajenas, lo que les ayuda a acumular conocimientos relevantes alineados con la metodología de lean startup.

3. **Interacciones y Feedback**: Los coaches consideran las sesiones como espacios donde los emprendedores pueden ofrecerse retroalimentación y aprender unos de otros. Se enfatiza la importancia de construir una cultura efectiva de intercambio de experiencias y apoyo mutuo.

4. **Presión y Motivación**: Los coaches implementan una dinámica de presión al exponer a los emprendedores a los logros de sus pares. Se les solicita que proporcionen actualizaciones sobre su progreso y aprendizajes, lo que genera un ambiente competitivo. Esta presión es vista como un medio para elevar las ambiciones de los emprendedores, motivándolos a ser más proactivos en sus interacciones con clientes y en el desarrollo de sus proyectos.

5. **Resultados de la Competencia**: La competencia entre emprendedores se traduce en un mejor rendimiento. Al observar el progreso de otros, los emprendedores se sienten impulsados a mejorar y a no ser los "peores" del grupo. La estructura de las sesiones, que incluye tareas y la posibilidad de calificación para continuar en el programa, refuerza esta dinámica competitiva.

6. **Datos Empíricos**: El texto incluye una tabla con datos empíricos que detalla las fuentes de información utilizadas en el estudio, como entrevistas con coaches y emprendedores, observaciones de sesiones de coaching, discusiones, presentaciones y cuestionarios cualitativos. Esto proporciona un contexto sólido para las afirmaciones realizadas sobre el impacto de las sesiones de coaching.

En resumen, las sesiones de coaching no solo son un medio para adquirir conocimientos sobre la metodología lean startup, sino que también actúan como catalizadores para la creación de redes, el aprendizaje colaborativo y la motivación a través de la competencia, lo que resulta en un entorno enriquecedor para los emprendedores. El texto presenta un estudio que utiliza un diseño de investigación etnográfica para explorar las prácticas de coaching en el contexto de la metodología Lean Startup. Se enfoca en cómo esta metodología influye y moldea dichas prácticas. La sección de discusión se divide en cuatro sub-secciones clave: la estructura de las sesiones de coaching, las dinámicas de la relación entre emprendedores y coaches, la paradoja de los datos en relación con la autoridad, y el aprendizaje vicario que ocurre durante estas sesiones.

### 1. Estructura de las sesiones de coaching
El estudio destaca que la experiencia de ingresar a un programa de aceleración y enfrentar desafíos similares fomenta la creación de lazos fuertes y una identidad común entre los emprendedores. Investigaciones previas han demostrado que la participación en conferencias y seminarios inspiradores relacionados con los problemas que enfrentan los emprendedores contribuye a aumentar su base de conocimientos. En el caso analizado, los coaches organizaron las sesiones de coaching siguiendo la metodología Lean Startup, lo que incentivó a los emprendedores a actuar y permitió una evaluación transparente de sus actividades. Se alentó a los emprendedores a compartir relatos detallados de sus actividades específicas, lo que ayudó a construir vínculos entre ellos.

### 2. Dinámicas de la relación emprendedor-coach
El programa de aceleración estudiado culminó con el anuncio de un equipo ganador que recibió inversión, creando un ambiente competitivo. Esto generó una dualidad en la experiencia de los emprendedores: por un lado, existía un sentimiento de comunidad donde la colaboración y cooperación eran la norma; por otro lado, había un sentido de competencia y rivalidad. La adopción de la metodología Lean Startup promovió ambos efectos, ya que llevó a los emprendedores a realizar actividades que captaran la atención de sus coaches, al mismo tiempo que utilizaban las sesiones de coaching para mejorar sus proyectos.

### 3. Paradoja de los datos y autoridad
Aunque el texto no detalla esta sub-sección, se sugiere que la relación entre los datos recopilados durante las sesiones de coaching y la autoridad de los coaches puede ser compleja. Es probable que la dependencia de datos objetivos para evaluar el progreso de los emprendedores genere tensiones en la dinámica de poder entre coaches y emprendedores.

### 4. Aprendizaje vicario
El aprendizaje vicario se refiere a la adquisición de conocimientos y habilidades a través de la observación de las experiencias de otros. Durante las sesiones de coaching, los emprendedores no solo aprenden de sus propias experiencias, sino también de las de sus compañeros, lo que enriquece su proceso de aprendizaje y desarrollo.

En resumen, el estudio proporciona una visión profunda de cómo la metodología Lean Startup se integra en las prácticas de coaching, fomentando tanto la colaboración como la competencia entre emprendedores, y cómo estas dinámicas influyen en su aprendizaje y desarrollo profesional. El texto aborda la relación entre emprendedores y coaches en el contexto de la metodología lean startup, destacando cómo estas interacciones se convierten en oportunidades para que los emprendedores comprendan y apliquen dicha metodología. A través de sesiones de coaching, los emprendedores participan en discusiones repetidas y reflexiones, tanto con sus coaches como con otros emprendedores, lo que se interpreta como un proceso de internalización del conocimiento y la adopción de principios orientadores.

### Dinámicas de la relación emprendedor-coach

1. **Formación de relaciones**: Las relaciones entre coaches y emprendedores pueden formarse de manera formal, como parte de programas preestablecidos (por ejemplo, programas de aceleración), o de manera informal, a través de relaciones personales. En el contexto de un programa de aceleración, los organizadores determinan cómo se emparejan a los emprendedores con los coaches, basándose en los intereses de los coaches en las ideas de negocio de los emprendedores.

2. **Impacto de la metodología lean startup**: La introducción de la metodología lean startup influye en la dinámica inicial de estas relaciones. La metodología establece la estructura y el contenido de las sesiones de coaching, lo que afecta cómo se desarrollan las interacciones entre emprendedores y coaches.

3. **Confianza y cercanía**: La efectividad de las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches depende en gran medida de un ambiente de confianza y cercanía. La confianza se considera un requisito previo para que la experiencia de los coaches se canalice de manera efectiva hacia el aprendizaje de los emprendedores. La metodología lean startup guía las conversaciones durante las sesiones de coaching y alinea las expectativas de los coaches con las de los emprendedores, creando un punto de partida común para las discusiones.

4. **Habilidades de los coaches**: La metodología también resalta las habilidades de los coaches en relación con el lean startup, lo que contribuye a generar un sentido de confianza mutua. Los coaches utilizan preguntas estratégicas que permiten a los emprendedores discutir abiertamente su progreso, facilitando así un aprendizaje más profundo y efectivo.

En resumen, el texto enfatiza la importancia de la metodología lean startup en la formación y desarrollo de relaciones efectivas entre emprendedores y coaches, donde la confianza y la estructura de las sesiones juegan un papel crucial en el proceso de aprendizaje y crecimiento de los emprendedores. El texto aborda la percepción que tienen los emprendedores sobre la legitimidad de los coaches en el contexto de la metodología lean startup. Se destaca que, aunque la experiencia y el conocimiento del coach son importantes, la percepción de su legitimidad también depende de otros factores, como su familiaridad con el área temática y su experiencia previa en coaching. A pesar de que los resultados sugieren que la experiencia del coach es más valorada que la metodología en sí, se plantea que la combinación de la metodología lean startup y la experiencia del coach influye en la relación entre emprendedores y coaches.

Un hallazgo significativo es el papel de la autoridad en las sesiones de coaching. A diferencia de lo que propone la metodología lean startup, que sugiere que los coaches actúen como facilitadores neutrales, en la práctica, los coaches son vistos como figuras de autoridad. Esto se debe a la estructura del programa de aceleración, que consta de tres fases y una ronda de calificación al final de la segunda fase. En este contexto, los coaches son percibidos más como figuras de autoridad cuyas opiniones son valoradas más que los datos obtenidos, lo que contrasta con la premisa de la metodología lean startup que prioriza los datos recolectados a través de interacciones con clientes potenciales sobre el conocimiento previo.

El texto señala que la experiencia del coach en desarrollo empresarial debería ser considerada solo como un medio para establecer legitimidad, lo que genera una situación paradójica: el coaching podría obstaculizar la adopción y ejecución de la metodología lean startup. Para superar esta paradoja, se sugiere que los coaches deben ser conscientes de su estilo de asesoramiento y de cómo buscan transformar a los emprendedores, enfocándose menos en su legitimidad y capacidades instructivas. En cambio, deberían fomentar la comunicación y el aprendizaje entre los miembros del equipo. Al mismo tiempo, es importante que los coaches establezcan una legitimidad básica para facilitar este proceso. El texto aborda la importancia del coaching en el contexto de la metodología lean startup, destacando cómo los coaches deben establecer una legitimidad básica para inspirar confianza y motivar a los emprendedores a adoptar esta metodología. Se enfatiza la necesidad de una comunicación clara y temprana por parte de los coaches, quienes actúan como facilitadores en el desarrollo de habilidades y en el proceso de consulta. Esto puede requerir una división clara de roles entre quienes seleccionan a los equipos y quienes actúan como coaches. Además, se menciona que la estructura del programa de aceleración resalta la figura de los coaches como autoridades, lo que puede socavar la validez de la evidencia empírica que los emprendedores recogen.

El texto también explora el concepto de aprendizaje vicario en las sesiones de coaching, donde se crea un espacio que permite a los emprendedores aprender de las experiencias de otros, lo que les ayuda a reducir los costos económicos y psicológicos asociados con el ensayo y error. Este tipo de aprendizaje, que se basa en la escucha y la reflexión, está condicionado por los valores que los individuos asocian con los resultados de las experiencias modeladas. Las conductas modeladas pueden ser comunicadas tanto por los coaches como por otros emprendedores, y este aprendizaje vicario se ve influenciado por la introducción de la metodología lean startup en la estructura de las sesiones de coaching.

Un factor que promueve el aprendizaje vicario es el reconocimiento de que otros pueden ofrecer perspectivas aplicables a los casos individuales de los emprendedores. Esto está vinculado a las nociones de legitimidad y autoridad, que son cruciales en la relación entre coaches y emprendedores. Se sugiere que es más importante construir confianza y legitimidad que simplemente autoridad, ya que esto facilita el aprendizaje vicario. Fomentar interacciones entre emprendedores también es valioso para cultivar este tipo de aprendizaje.

Las seminarios inspiracionales desempeñan un papel importante al legitimar la metodología lean startup, ya que los oradores, considerados figuras legítimas y conocedoras de la metodología, permiten a los emprendedores aprender de sus experiencias exitosas, lo que refuerza su motivación para seguir las instrucciones de la metodología.

Finalmente, el texto señala que, a pesar de la rápida aceptación de la metodología lean startup en la comunidad emprendedora, existe una falta de evidencia sobre su efectividad y un conocimiento limitado sobre el papel del coaching emprendedor en aceleradoras que utilizan esta metodología. Las implicaciones teóricas del estudio se centran en los efectos de cambio de comportamiento de la metodología lean startup y su capacidad para construir confianza entre los emprendedores. El texto aborda la metodología utilizada en aceleradoras, centrándose en cuatro aspectos clave: 1) los efectos que cambian el comportamiento, 2) las cualidades que fomentan la confianza, 3) las limitaciones de la metodología y 4) su potencial para abrir un nuevo diálogo sobre el papel pragmático de los métodos empresariales en las prácticas de coaching empresarial.

En primer lugar, se destaca que la metodología de "lean startup", empleada por los coaches en las aceleradoras, tiene efectos significativos tanto en las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches como en el aprendizaje vicario entre los emprendedores. Estos efectos transformadores observados en el estudio no se derivan únicamente del contexto de coaching o de la aceleradora, sino que también son resultado de la introducción de la metodología "lean".

El estudio sugiere que la implementación de esta metodología puede modificar la forma en que los emprendedores interactúan con sus coaches y entre ellos, promoviendo un ambiente de aprendizaje colaborativo. Además, se menciona que la confianza entre los participantes puede verse fortalecida a través de la aplicación de esta metodología, lo que a su vez puede facilitar un mejor intercambio de ideas y experiencias.

Sin embargo, el texto también señala que existen limitaciones en la metodología "lean startup". Estas limitaciones pueden afectar la efectividad del coaching y el aprendizaje en el contexto de las aceleradoras, lo que plantea la necesidad de una evaluación crítica de su aplicación.

Finalmente, se sugiere que la metodología "lean" tiene el potencial de abrir nuevas conversaciones sobre el papel de los métodos empresariales en el coaching emprendedor, lo que podría llevar a una evolución en las prácticas de coaching y en la forma en que se apoyan a los emprendedores en su desarrollo. En resumen, el estudio resalta la importancia de la metodología "lean startup" en el contexto de las aceleradoras, así como sus efectos transformadores, su capacidad para construir confianza, sus limitaciones y su potencial para enriquecer el diálogo sobre el coaching empresarial. El texto aborda el papel de los métodos emprendedores, especialmente la metodología de lean startup, en la transformación del comportamiento de los emprendedores y en la función de los coaches dentro de programas de aceleración. Se argumenta que estos métodos no solo sirven como herramientas para organizar actividades empresariales, sino que también actúan como "objetos de frontera" que facilitan la transición de los coaches de ser figuras autoritarias a convertirse en habilitadores de cambios conductuales en los emprendedores.

Se destaca la necesidad de investigar más a fondo cómo los métodos emprendedores influyen en los resultados empresariales. Una pregunta clave que se plantea es si la metodología lean startup puede tener un impacto similar en la práctica diaria de los emprendedores, como lo tiene en contextos más formales y estructurados, como los programas de aceleración.

El estudio subraya la importancia del rol de los coaches y los desafíos que enfrentan al diseñar programas de aceleración basados en la metodología lean startup. Tradicionalmente, los aceleradores han centrado sus actividades en una combinación de teorías de planificación empresarial y la experiencia de los coaches. La experiencia de los coaches es crucial en la relación con los emprendedores, ya que son considerados expertos y su conocimiento se utiliza como guía para la acción futura.

Sin embargo, la inclusión de la metodología lean startup introduce complicaciones en el diseño de estos programas y en el papel de los coaches. Por lo tanto, se sugiere que es necesario reconsiderar la función de los coaches en estos entornos. En lugar de ejercer una autoridad experta, los coaches deberían adoptar un enfoque de consulta que evite caer en la trampa de la autoridad autoritaria. Se propone que los coaches actúen más como facilitadores del aprendizaje y desarrollo de habilidades, limitando su asesoramiento autoritario a sugerencias y opciones, permitiendo así que los emprendedores dirijan sus propios procesos. En resumen, el texto aboga por un cambio en la dinámica entre coaches y emprendedores, promoviendo un enfoque más colaborativo y menos jerárquico en el desarrollo empresarial. El texto analiza las dinámicas de las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches en un programa de aceleración basado en la metodología de lean startup en Suecia. Se argumenta que los coaches deben formular sus consejos y opiniones como hipótesis que requieren validación, en lugar de presentarlos como hechos basados en experiencias pasadas. Esto es crucial para que los emprendedores puedan tomar decisiones informadas y basadas en datos, en lugar de depender excesivamente de la experiencia de los coaches.

Un hallazgo importante es que la dualidad de roles entre coaches y organizadores en el programa estudiado llevó a que algunos emprendedores valoraran más la experiencia de sus coaches que la información obtenida de potenciales clientes. Esta situación contradice los principios de la metodología lean startup y genera confusión entre los emprendedores, lo que sugiere la necesidad de rediseñar los programas de aceleración para minimizar sesgos cognitivos como el anclaje y el sesgo de confirmación.

La conclusión del estudio resalta que la introducción de la metodología lean startup afecta directamente las relaciones entre emprendedores y coaches, ya que esta metodología establece la estructura y el contenido de las sesiones de coaching, proporcionando un punto de partida común para las discusiones. Esto fomenta la confianza, promueve interacciones honestas y aumenta la disposición de los participantes a cambiar su comportamiento, contribuyendo así a una estrategia de coaching evolutiva que busca transformar y desarrollar a los emprendedores.

A diferencia del coaching basado en planes de negocio, que tiende a ser más funcional, en este contexto los coaches no son percibidos como facilitadores neutrales, sino como figuras de autoridad cuyas opiniones son valoradas más que los datos. Además, la estructura de las sesiones de coaching permite episodios de aprendizaje vicario, que son más rápidos que la experiencia directa, lo que resalta la importancia de la metodología lean startup en la formación de emprendedores. El texto proporcionado es una extensa lista de referencias bibliográficas que abordan diversos aspectos del emprendimiento, la incubación de empresas, el coaching y la educación empresarial. A continuación, se presenta un resumen detallado de los temas y enfoques tratados en las obras citadas:

1. **Incubación de Empresas**: Varias referencias, como las de Bøllingtoft (2012) y Bruneel et al. (2012), analizan la evolución de los incubadores de negocios, destacando la importancia de las redes y la cooperación en entornos emprendedores. Se discuten las diferencias entre generaciones de incubadoras y cómo estas se adaptan a las necesidades cambiantes de los emprendedores.

2. **Coaching y Mentoring**: Autores como Brockbank (2008) y Cox (2013) exploran el coaching como una herramienta para el desarrollo personal y profesional. Se presentan tipologías de enfoques de coaching y se discute su efectividad en el aprendizaje y la reflexión. Además, se menciona la importancia de la relación entre coach y coachee para el éxito del proceso.

3. **Educación Empresarial**: Hytti y O’Gorman (2004) analizan los objetivos y métodos de la educación empresarial en Europa, mientras que Ollila y Williams-Middleton (2011) integran la educación emprendedora con la incubación en el contexto universitario. Se enfatiza la necesidad de preparar a los estudiantes para el entorno empresarial actual.

4. **Innovación y Creatividad**: Brown (2008) introduce el concepto de "design thinking" como un enfoque para fomentar la innovación en las empresas. Lynn et al. (1996) discuten el proceso de "probe and learn" en la innovación discontinuada, sugiriendo que la experimentación es clave para el desarrollo de nuevos productos.

5. **Redes y Colaboración**: Cohen y Hochberg (2014) abordan el fenómeno de los aceleradores de startups, destacando cómo estos programas ayudan a los emprendedores a construir redes y acceder a recursos. Cooper et al. (2012) investigan las motivaciones y obstáculos para el networking en incubadoras universitarias.

6. **Desarrollo de Habilidades Emprendedoras**: Kutzhanova et al. (2009) discuten el desarrollo de habilidades a través del coaching personal y grupal, enfatizando su papel en el crecimiento empresarial. Mian et al. (2016) ofrecen una visión general del estado del conocimiento sobre la incubación de negocios tecnológicos.

7. **Teoría y Práctica del Emprendimiento**: Davidsson y Honig (2003) examinan el papel del capital social en el emprendimiento, mientras que Martinez et al. (2011) abordan el emprendimiento como un proceso evolutivo, identificando desafíos y avances en la investigación en este campo.

8. **Modelos de Negocio**: Osterwalder et al. (2005) clarifican el concepto de modelos de negocio, analizando su origen y evolución. Este enfoque es crucial para entender cómo las empresas pueden crear y capturar valor en un entorno competitivo.

9. **Perspectivas Regionales y Universitarias**: McAdam et al. (2016) y Lundqvist (2014) analizan la incubación en contextos regionales y universitarios, destacando la importancia de las políticas y el apoyo institucional para el desarrollo de startups innovadoras.

10. **Psicología y Coaching**: O’Broin y Palmer (2009) abordan la creación de una alianza de coaching óptima desde una perspectiva cognitivo-conductual, sugiriendo que la relación entre el coach y el cliente es fundamental para el éxito del coaching.

En resumen, estas referencias ofrecen una visión integral sobre el emprendimiento, el coaching y la educación, subrayando la interconexión entre el capital humano, las metodologías de gestión y el desarrollo de habilidades en entornos de alta incertidumbre.
