Entrepreneurial Policy: The Case of RegionalSpecialization vs.Spontaneous IndustrialDiversity Pierre Desrochers Frederic Sautet Regional economic development policy is recognized as a key tool governments use to foster economic prosperity. Whether specialization (or diversity) of economic activitiesshould be a regional development policy goal is often debated. We address this question ina local-diversity context, by reviewing traditional arguments in its favor, supplemented withevidence for more entrepreneurial concepts like industrial symbiosis and Jacobs exter-nalities. We show that the context of entrepreneurship matters more to policy than the typeand form of resulting industries. Policies enabling entrepreneurs to exploit opportunities ina context of spontaneously evolved industrial diversity are better facilitators of regionaldevelopment. Introduction Regional development prescriptions based on the promotion of geographically local- ized, related, and interdependent ﬁrms can be traced back at least to the “growth pole,”“growth center,” and “industrial complex” strategies implemented in numerous countriesin the 1960s and 1970s. While the main goals of these policies were to create agglom-eration economies (or “external economies of scale”) and to increase productivity, morerecent approaches—with Michael Porter’s (1990) cluster strategy being by far the mostinﬂuential—have emphasized the positive impact that a regional context made up ofgeographically proximate and industry-related ﬁrms and institutions can have on entre-preneurial and innovative activities. While the cluster strategy has been criticized onseveral counts, ranging from its fuzziness to its status as a rationale for supportingpolitically favored industries (Bathelt, 2005; Desrochers & Sautet, 2004; Rocha, 2004), ithas nonetheless successfully overturned the previously prevalent diversiﬁcation objectiveof most local development ofﬁcials and established regional specialization as the preferredgoal
most local development ofﬁcials and established regional specialization as the preferredgoal (Rosenfeld, 2001). Please send correspondence to: Pierre Desrochers, tel.: (905) 828-5206; e-mail: pierre.desrochers@ utoronto.ca, to Frederic Sautet at fsautet@gmu.edu.PTE&1042-2587 © 2008 Baylor University 813 September, 2008
As Rocha and Sternberg (2005, p. 267) point out, however, research on the impact of local conditions on entrepreneurial behavior remains theoretically and empirically scarcedue to “conceptual, theoretical, and methodological limitations.” Taking a broad view ofentrepreneurial activities, which it deﬁnes as the creation of new economic activities andthe pursuit of innovation, this essay aims to address this issue by suggesting that a“successful” policy push toward specialization might contain the seeds of its own demiseby leaving regional economies more vulnerable to cyclical downturns and less likely tosupport the emergence of innovative practices and behavior, such as the development ofinterindustry linkages and new combinations of existing technologies and materials(“Jacobs externalities”). 1 The issue is not that regional specialization policies are developed at the expense of spontaneous industrial diversity. Indeed, the two can coexist. Rather, we argue thatentrepreneurial activity is at the source of regional development and that theory andevidence seem to indicate that spontaneously developed industrial and economic localdiversity typically provide a better substrate for entrepreneurs to innovate. While we donot argue the pursuit of diversity as a policy goal, we strongly emphasize the limits andproblems inherent to regional specialization strategies by pointing out that a diverseenvironment is often a necessary precondition for the spontaneous emergence of diverselocal specializations. The paper is structured as follows. The ﬁrst section reviews the main points of contention in a long-standing debate among academics, local development professionals,members of local business associations, and policy makers as to the respective advan-tages and pitfalls of the regional specialization and diversity of economic activities. Thesecond section brieﬂy evaluates whether planned regional specialization efforts, byfar the most dominant perspective in recent years, have
planned regional specialization efforts, byfar the most dominant perspective in recent years, have been successful. The remainderof the paper discusses four arguments that limit the case in favor of publicly plannedregional specialization: (1) interindustrial linkages and industrial symbiosis (i.e., wasterecovery linkages between different industries), (2) Jacobs externalities (i.e., knowledgespillovers between different industries), (3) local environment and proximity, and (4) therole of entrepreneurship. This essay supplements the current literature on these topics in two ways. First, we survey a now largely forgotten body of historical evidence on by-product developmentthat both supports the widespread nature of industrial symbiosis and discusses its rationalefrom the entrepreneur’s perspective. We then describe how Jacobs externalities actuallyoccur by synthesizing the main patterns of outcome observed in a qualitative survey ofFrench-Canadian entrepreneurs. This material leads us to conclude that the regionalsetting most conducive to entrepreneurial activity is probably a diversiﬁed city made up ofmany specialized clusters, which is what most thriving cities have historically spontane-ously evolved into. Regional Specialization as Economic Policy The geographical concentration of related manufacturing and service ﬁrms is prob- ably as old as economic development. For example, Rogers (1884) refers to a document 1. In the following pages, we use Joseph Schumpeter’s distinction between invention and innovation: An innovation is a socially beneﬁcial invention. From this perspective, an innovator is also necessarily anentrepreneur. However, an entrepreneur is not necessarily an innovator. 814 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
published around the year 1250 that documents the following localized English indu- stries: schooling (Oxford), eels (Cambridge), scarlet (Lincoln), blanket (Bligh), burnet(Beverley), russet (Colchester), linen fabrics (Shaftesbury, Lewes, Aylesham), cord(Warwick, Bridport), hempen fabrics (Bridport), ﬁne bread (Wycombe, Hungerford,St. Albans), knives (Maxstead), needles (Wilton), razors (Leicester), etc. In later centuries, such geographical concentrations of economic activities would often be explained by applying the law of comparative advantage (Ricardo, 1817/1821) atthe subnational level. In short, by specializing in the production of one type of good (e.g.,automobile production) or one set of related goods (e.g., transportation equipment) forwhich they have a relative advantage (in terms of opportunity costs of producing thegood), urban agglomerations or larger regions are made better off than if they only haveaccess to autarkic production. This is said to be true whether a region or a city has anabsolute advantage in only one good (the one it specializes in) or has an absoluteadvantage in the production of every good—as long as differences in opportunity costs inproduction make it advantageous for the city to specialize. 2Not surprisingly, policy makers have long attempted to promote the development of what have most famouslybeen labeled “industrial districts” (Marshall, 1890/1920). Perhaps the earliest interven-tions in this respect involved immigration policy. As Marshall (1890/1920, book 4, chap.10, nonpaginated) observed several decades ago: Very often the rulers deliberately invited artisans from a distance and settled them in a group together. Thus the mechanical faculty of Lancashire is said to be due to theinﬂuence of Norman smiths who were settled at Warrington by Hugo de Lupus inWilliam the Conqueror’s time. And the greater part of England’s manufacturingindustry before the era of cotton and steam had its course directed by settlements ofFlemish and
before the era of cotton and steam had its course directed by settlements ofFlemish and other artisans; many of which were made under the immediate directionof Plantagenet and Tudor kings. These immigrants taught us how to weave woollenand worsted stuffs, though for a long time we sent our cloths to the Netherlands to befulled and dyed. They taught us how to cure herrings, how to manufacture silk, howto make lace, glass, and paper, and to provide for many other of our wants. In the more recent past, policy prescriptions based on the promotion of geographically localized, related, and interdependent ﬁrms have included the “growth pole,” “growthcenter,” and “industrial complex” strategies implemented in numerous countries in the1960s and 1970s (Chapman, 2005; Chapman & Walker, 1987; Hansen, 1996; Rocha,2004; Wheeler, Muller, Thrall, & Fink, 1998). In short, growth pole strategies werecentered around “clusters of industries” (Chapman & Walker, 1987, p. 216), including atleast one “propulsive sector” that was said to quickly develop the main characteristics ofmodern large-scale industry and, being in an early stage of the product cycle, had highergrowth potential than average for manufacturing. Because of its size, importance, andinterconnections with other “affected industries” and activities, this key industry’s growthbeneﬁted the local area through increased employment, purchasing power, and the attrac-tion of other economic activities. Although the concept was originally dynamic and linkedto innovation, in practice it was often restricted by “reliance on input–output analysis anda focus on large industries” (Chapman & Walker). Growth centers, for their part, were 2. Ricardo and later mainstream economists assumed that only production costs mattered and ignored transportation costs. In recent years, the law of comparative advantage has been challenged by some econo-mists opposed to the traditional free-trade perspective, on the grounds that political institutions
opposed to the traditional free-trade perspective, on the grounds that political institutions should shapemarkets and that diversity matters more than efﬁciency. See Roberto Mangabeira Unger (2007) for instance. 815 September, 2008
essentially means of organizing public infrastructure more efﬁciently by concentrating them geographically, a process which typically generated much political opposition frominhabitants of nonfavored areas. Finally, industrial complex strategies consisted of studieslooking “at the location of a group of interrelated industries, looking at interconnections,the relative advantage of each component parts, and the attraction of locating a complexwith or without its various component parts (Chapman & Walker, p. 217). While the main goals of these policies were to create agglomeration economies and to increase productivity, more recent approaches—the most prominent being by farPorter’s (1990, 1998, 2000a, 2000b) cluster strategy which revolves around the promotionand reinforcement of “a geographically proximate group of interconnected companies andassociated institutions in a particular ﬁeld, linked by commonalities and complementari-ties (2000a: 16)”—have emphasized the positive impact that a regional context made upof geographically proximate and industry-related ﬁrms and institutions can have oninnovative activities (Bathelt, Malmberg, & Maskell, 2004; Cortright, 2006; Khan &Ghani, 2004; Rocha, 2004). Spatial economic analysts have also long described the importance of some positive externalities such as localization economies that occur when ﬁrms involved in the sameline of business are in close geographical proximity, allowing them to beneﬁt from assetsharing, common labor pooling, better access to intermediate inputs, increased face-to-face communication (which facilitates the communication of tacit knowledge and thedevelopment of trust-based relationships), and knowledge spillovers on related technolo-gies (Marshall, 1890/1920; Rosenthal & Strange, 2004). Traditional Case against Regional Specialization The idea that government-led regional specialization delivers the results claimed by its supporters has been challenged on several counts. A main theoretical
the results claimed by its supporters has been challenged on several counts. A main theoretical argument in thisrespect invokes another class of externalities, urbanization economies, by which thegeographical concentration of a wide variety of ﬁrms generates signiﬁcant beneﬁts acrossdifferent lines of work. For example, software engineering, accounting, advertising,manpower, and catering ﬁrms, among many others, can often serve a different array ofcustomers in a particular geographical area better and/or cheaper than if these ﬁrms weremaintaining these functions within their corporate structure. Transport infrastructures,such as ports and airports, also beneﬁt a wide array of localized businesses. A diversiﬁedlocal economic structure is also believed to generate a greater “multiplier” effect whennew productive activities are added to the local mix, in the process providing newcustomers to a whole range of (as opposed to a few) local producers (Dicken & Lloyd,1990; Hoover & Giarratani, 1984; Wheeler et al., 1998). Another argument rests on the fact that diversiﬁed local economies have always been more stable and resilient than highly specialized regions whose fates rested on theultimately temporary demand for a particular type of good or service (Chapman, 2005).This was certainly obvious to Alfred Marshall (1890/1920, book 4, chap. 10, nonpagi-nated) who observed that “a district which is dependent chieﬂy on one industry is liableto extreme depression, in case of a falling-off in the demand for its produce, or of a failurein the supply of the raw material which it uses,” but that this problem was “in a greatmeasure avoided by those large towns or large industrial districts in which several distinctindustries are strongly developed.” His contemporary, Malcom Keir (1919, p. 47), simi-larly wrote that few places were harder hit during difﬁcult times than “every town whoseindustries are not diversiﬁed.” 816 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Many studies have tried to estimate the extent, magnitude, and respective importance of localization and urbanization economies, but these measurements have always beenproblematic (Rosenthal & Strange, 2004; Siegel, Johnson, & Alwang, 1995), as hasbeen the development of a workable concept of diversity. Indeed, according to Malizia andFeser (1999, p. 92), economic diversity can only be deﬁned operationally as the presenceof multiple specializations, a point that has always resulted in much analytical confusion.Furthermore, as Rocha and Sternberg (2005, p. 267) point out, while research on theimpact of local conditions on entrepreneurial behavior remains both theoretically andempirically scarce due to a number of methodological, theoretical, and conceptual limi-tations, entrepreneurship and clusters are themselves “complex phenomena that defydeﬁnition, which in turn undermines theory building and testing.” Be that as it may,econometric studies supporting either the beneﬁts of specialization or diversity can befound (Polese, 2005). In spite of the theoretical and empirical difﬁculties to establish the actual impact of regional specialization on entrepreneurial behavior, we believe that another set of argu-ments can be used to evaluate the rationale underlying policy efforts to promote andreinforce the regional specialization of speciﬁc lines of work. Our case rests on the ideathat economies, regions, and cities are self-organizing systems driven by entrepreneurialand innovative behavior, which is itself more likely to be stimulated in a more (as opposedto less) diverse environment. This idea will be explored in the context of four speciﬁcissues: (1) interindustrial recovery linkages, (2) Jacobs externalities, (3) the role of thelocal environment, and (4) the role of entrepreneurial activity. Interindustrial Recovery Linkages Urbanization economies can take many forms, including linkages between different types of industry that are created by entrepreneurs in order to
linkages between different types of industry that are created by entrepreneurs in order to turn the industrial waste ofone into the valuable input of another. While the phenomenon was identiﬁed long ago(Renner, 1947), it was not until the last two decades that it began to generate sustainedacademic interest under the broad interdisciplinary umbrella known as “industrialecology” (Ayres & Ayres, 2002). Industrial ecologists’ core insight is a simple one: Whycould our industrial system not behave more like an ecosystem where the waste of onespecies is the vital input of another? Interestingly, some of them have looked into thephysical exchange of materials, energy, water, and by-products among geographicallyproximate, but diverse, factories and plants, a phenomenon eventually labeled “industrialsymbiosis” (Chertow, 2000). In its current incarnation, industrial symbiosis ﬁrst gained attention at the turn of the 1990s after Danish teenagers working on a high-school project noticed numerous waste-recycling linkages in their small, but economically diversiﬁed, hometown of Kalundborg.Further research later revealed that the city and its surrounding region were hosts tonumerous water (seven), energy (six), and solid waste (six) symbiotic relationships(Jacobsen, 2006; Jacobsen & Anderberg, 2004). Among the entrepreneurial actions thatcreated these linkages in the last four decades are the following. In 1972, a pipeline wasinstalled that brought an excess amount of gas from the local Statoil reﬁnery (that wouldhave otherwise been burned as waste) to a Gyproc plaster board factory to dry theirproduction. Following the ﬁrst oil crisis, Danish power stations converted from oil to coal,in the process generating a large amount of ﬂy ash, which the Kalundborg Asnæs stationmanagers sold to cement companies. In 1976, managers at a local Novo Nordisk plant thatproduced insulin and industrial enzymes began selling its sludge-like biomass made up of 817 September, 2008
dead microorganisms to local farmers for use as fertilizer. A few years later, power station employees made an arrangement to get their hands on the reﬁnery’s spent cooling waterwhen they needed to expand their operations. Figure 1 describes most current linkages. Perhaps the most striking feature of the Kalundborg case was that these spontaneous developments resulted from decentralized entrepreneurial actions that built on readilyexisting industrial diversity. Jorgen Christensen, a spokesperson for Novo Nordisk, wasexplicit on this point: “We didn’t design the whole thing. It wasn’t designed at all. Ithappened over time” (quoted in Lowe, 1995, p. 15). Henning Grann, a Statoil employee,reinforces the point: “The symbiosis project is originally not the result of a carefulenvironmental planning process. It is rather the result of a gradual development ofcooperation between four neighbouring industries and the Kalundborg municipality”(quoted in Garner & Keoleian, 1995, p. 28). In each case, some local managers andentrepreneurs were confronted with a particular problem—either the (often costly) dis-posal of potentially valuable resources or the constant need for better and/or cheaperinputs—and saw opportunities in the local diversiﬁed economy to improve the competi-tive stance of their operations. Knowledge about the Kalundborg case inspired further research and the later “discovery” of similar spontaneous linkages in various regions of Europe and theUnited States (Desrochers, 2001b, 2002a; Wolf, Eklund, & Söderström, 2007). DespiteFigure 1 The Kalundborg Industrial Symbiosis (2002) Source: Jacobsen (2006, p. 242) 818 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
widespread beliefs as to the novel character of such linkages (Desrochers, 2002b), much historical evidence suggests that they are probably as old as economic development andhave certainly been widespread in all advanced economies in the last two centuries.Perhaps the best sources on the topic are a number of now largely forgotten compendiumswhose aim was to provide concise overviews of the technical literature of their time bydocumenting thousands of proﬁtable waste-recovery cases (Desrochers, 2007; Kershaw,1928; Koller, 1918; Lipsett, 1963; Simmonds, 1876). Whereas covering the entrepreneurial history behind successful attempts to turn wastes into by-products is beyond the scope of this paper, Talbot (1920, pp. 17–18)perhaps best summarized the dominant opinion on the topic in the late nineteenth andearly twentieth century when he observed that “to relate all the fortunes which have beenamassed from the commercialization of what was once rejected and valueless wouldrequire a volume” and that this would be “a story of fascinating romance and one difﬁcultto parallel in the whole realm of human activity.” Indeed, Karl Marx (1894 , V ol. 3, part1, chap. 5, nonpaginated) shared this assessment when he wrote that capitalism extended“the utilisation of the excretions of production and consumption” and that the “so-calledwaste plays an important role in almost every industry.” Several past commentators observed that the development of by-products, especially those that were difﬁcult and/or costly to transport, often reinforced agglomerative ten-dencies. Ross (1896, p. 256) explained the geographical concentration of industries atleast in part by “the cluster of side industries that grow up about packing establishments,reﬁneries, or gasworks, engaged in turning refuse into by-products,” while Devas (1901,p. 98) highlighted the role of the “greater growth of subsidiary industries, such namelyas supply materials and utilize refuse, to do which for a single factory would not
such namelyas supply materials and utilize refuse, to do which for a single factory would not beworthwhile.” Talbot (1920, p. 303) pointed out that, in order to be successful, “co-operative and individual methods [of resource recovery ]...c a n only be conducted upon the requisite scale in the very largest cities where the volume of material to be handled isrelatively heavy” because “waste must be forthcoming in a steady stream of uniformvolume to justify its exploitation, and the fashioning and maintenance of these streams isthe supreme difﬁculty.” Keir (1919, pp. 39–40) similarly wrote that localization “attracts to itself plants whose business is the utilization of waste products” and that, for the factories, “the presence ofthe waste-using shops turns a loss into a proﬁt, a charge into a credit or a liability into anasset.” He observed that each additional recovery plant added “an increment to theimportance of a locality as the center of an industry,” for “by transforming liabilities intoassets, and turning costs into proﬁts,” they aided “in the defense of the community againstthe onslaughts of outside competition” and therefore augmented “the growth of theindustry in the location where it is already rooted.” He illustrated these processes with various cases, such as a great cement plant in Bufﬁngton, Indiana, that fed upon the slag (“the scum of impurities taken from the orewhen it is melted”) of the largest steel mill in the United States located in the nearbytown of Gary; the cap shops of New York City that were usually located next door toclothing factories in order to have easy access to their remnants; a glue and mucilagemanufacturer in Gloucester, Massachusetts, whose main input was the heads and tails ofﬁsh from what was then one of the most important ﬁshing ports in the world; and a“brass laundry” in Waterbury, Connecticut, whose employees recovered machine shopoil and separated brass from other materials collected from nearby businesses. Again, ineach
shopoil and separated brass from other materials collected from nearby businesses. Again, ineach case, creative and entrepreneurial individuals saw opportunities in problematicsituations and ended up creating what are now typically referred to as economy-environment “win-win” situations. 819 September, 2008
The recent rediscovery of industrial symbiosis paved the way for a few planning exercises through which public ofﬁcials attempted to replicate the Kalundborg experience.While so-called “eco-industrial parks” are most likely unsound in theory (Desrochers,2001c) and have typically failed to live up to expectations in practice (Deutz & Gibbs,2004), their planning stage has nonetheless highlighted the fact that specialization-oriented cluster development is fundamentally incompatible with the spontaneous emer-gence of industrial symbiosis through decentralized entrepreneurial initiatives. As Chiu(2002) observes in the context of Asian initiatives in this respect, many investors com-plained that they were not allowed to pick their preferred location, while many estatemanagers claimed that they could not select the right industrial mix to further localeconomic development and symbiotic linkages. The evidence seems to show that interindustrial recovery linkages emerge spontane- ously shaped by the forces of entrepreneurial innovation. While industrial parks, growthpoles, and other policies may vary signiﬁcantly in the magnitude of their impact on localeconomies, we are not so much concerned in this paper with their relative effect, but ratherwith the idea that there exist better ways to foster local innovation and entrepreneurshipthan policies that deliberately aim to foster the regional specialization of economicactivities. Industrial symbiosis is but one recent argument that shows the limits of suchpolicies. Perhaps even more important is the concept now referred to as “Jacobs exter-nalities.” We now turn to a discussion of this idea. Jacobs Externalities One of the least controversial aspects of technological change is that innovations are created through new combinations of previously unrelated things. As Babbage (1832,chap. 27, non-paginated) put it, the “power of inventing mechanical contrivances, and ofcombining machinery, does not appear, if we may judge from the
mechanical contrivances, and ofcombining machinery, does not appear, if we may judge from the frequency of itsoccurrences, to be a difﬁcult or a rare gift.” For example, almost four centuries ago in theNetherlands, windmill technologies used for water pumping were adapted for woodsawing, while in the nineteenth century American telegraph companies borrowed the“template” developed by railroad companies to handle the ﬂows of multiple messages toand from multiple locations (Bunker & Ciccantell, 2005). The ﬁrst applications of dieselengines were in stationary uses (pumps and oil drills) and in heavy transport (boats andlocomotives) (Smil, 2005), while “everything we eat, wear, and use” is now made withsome help from electric motors (p. 79). Building on this insight, urban theorist Jane Jacobs (1969) argued that economically diversiﬁed cities provide the best setting for “adding new work to old.” Although hertheoretical framework is broader and encompasses factors such as access to capital,zoning regulations, and the importance of agglomeration economies for entrepreneurialstart-ups, so-called “Jacobs externalities” are now broadly understood to mean “inter-industrial knowledge spillovers” occurring in economically diverse cities as a result of theinteraction of individuals possessing different backgrounds (Algaze, 2005; Desrochers &Hospers, 2007). By contrast, a local economy that is not well diversiﬁed is obviouslymuch less likely to promote the development of new combinations. Of course, individualsmay move from one geographical area to another, or have sustained collaborations withother individuals in more remote locations, but this does not undermine the fact that amore diversiﬁed local economy increases the probability and ease of creating new com-binations, although it is not an absolute prerequisite in this respect. 820 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
In the last decade and a half, the authors of several econometric papers have examined the concept by distinguishing between traditional “static” externalities (such as alreadyexisting agglomeration economies) and more dynamic ones, such as knowledge ﬂowsbetween ﬁrms and industries. They have attempted to test the relative importance ofJacobs externalities against the traditional view that regional specialization should bemore beneﬁcial in terms of innovative, and therefore commercially successful, behavior(Feldman, 2000; Glaeser, Kallal, Scheinkman, & Shleifer, 1992; van der Panne & vanBeers, 2006). Reviewing these contributions, Duranton and Puga (2000, p. 53) concludethat the “link between innovation and diversity seems fairly robust” and that “highlyinnovative clusters cannot be bred in previously specialized environments.” This literature, however, can be criticized on several counts. Perhaps most signiﬁcant is that these studies rely on location quotients and similar relative measures of sectoralconcentrations or diversity in large metropolitan areas that are then correlated (or not) with“outputs” such as innovations or new product advertised in the technical literature; patentdata; answers to questionnaires enquiring about the adoption/introduction of new tech-nologies; or employment, income, and productivity growth. Researchers then invokelocalized knowledge spillovers when commenting upon their results, but these studies donot document them or even prove their existence (Breschi & Lissoni, 2001a, 2001b;Hansen, 2002; Quigley, 1998). Commenting on these and more qualitative studies on“learning regions” that emphasize the creative capacity of regions, networks, and infor-mational technologies, Hansen (2002, p. 261) argues that more meaningful analyses of thetopic “would require disaggregated empirical studies of how knowledge in fact passesamong persons.” While the actual processes through which these new combinations occur have rarely been discussed in any
the actual processes through which these new combinations occur have rarely been discussed in any depth, 3a case can be made that any innovative individual can only combine different resources through two basic processes. The ﬁrst is to incorporate a newtype of material/process/product (M/P/P) to a previously unrelated M/P/P, while thesecond is to ﬁnd a new use for an existing M/P/P (Desrochers, 2000, 2001d). Examples ofthe former include Thomas Edison’s idea of a screw base for his light bulbs that came tohim in 1880 as he unscrewed the cover of a kerosene can (Smil, 2005), and the Americancontainer shipping pioneer Charles McLean whose inspiration can be traced back to hisdays as a trucker watching bales of cotton being hauled by sweating laborers, with thetrailer eventually becoming the container (Jung, 2005). In a corporate context, some ofthe early success of the Ford Motor Company can be traced back to the successfulintegration of sheet steel punch and presswork technologies used in the bicycle industryand to the development of the assembly line through the adaptation of ideas and tech-niques previously used in the “disassembly lines” of meatpackers and in ﬂour milling(Hounshell, 1991/1984). Numerous examples of new uses found for existing know-how can be observed in the so-called “bicycle craze” that hit the United States in the late nineteenth century. In NewEngland, numerous arms makers, sewing machine companies, and other small-itemmanufacturing concerns competed to enter this line of business. In the Midwest, bicyclebuilders “emerged primarily from the ranks of carriage- and wagon makers, wooden toyand novelty specialists, agricultural implement makers, or as totally new enterprises”(Hounshell, 1991/1984, p. 208). Another well-documented case is the rapid diversiﬁcationof German synthetic dyes manufacturers in the early twentieth century which, in time, turn 3. One exception is Goldfarb’s (2005) short case studies on the diffusion of electric motors
turn 3. One exception is Goldfarb’s (2005) short case studies on the diffusion of electric motors between 1880 and 1930 to urban transit, printing, and paper making. 821 September, 2008
their basic raw material (coal tar derived from coal gasiﬁcation) into a suitable input for the manufacture of products ranging from explosives, medicines, and perfumes to ﬂavor-ing materials, sweeteners, disinfectants, antitoxins, and tracing and photographic agents(Beer, 1959/1981). Perhaps the main reason for the paucity of detailed accounts of interindustrial knowl- edge spillovers in diversiﬁed cities is the difﬁculty of tracking a large number of indi-viduals who move frequently between different lines of work and/or regularly borrowideas from ﬁelds other than their own. Most individual innovators, however, tend to ﬁt thisproﬁle (Brown, 1988). In a preliminary attempt to better understand the processesinvolved in the creation of new combinations in a diversiﬁed urban setting, semistructuredface-to-face interviews were conducted with 45 southern Quebec (Canada) entrepreneurs,43 of which were French-Canadians (Desrochers, 2000). What follows is a synthesis ofthe broader patterns observed in this group of individuals, along with a few illustrativeexamples. 4 Despite their very different characteristics and backgrounds, striking regularities were observed in all innovators’ creative processes, with individuals often going back and forthbetween the following steps: (1) problem identiﬁcation; (2) examination of a wide rangeof potential solutions; (3) trial and error; (4) creation of a new combination; (5) newproblem identiﬁcation, as there can be never be a perfect artifact. Individuals had only twoways of creating new combinations of existing products, processes, and materials: (1) ﬁnda new use for something with which they were familiar; (2) incorporate something withwhich they were previously unfamiliar into something with which they were alreadyfamiliar. All individuals admitted that they frequently borrowed and adapted existing things in new ways, whether they were working on a particular invention or in production activities.The main processes in this respect
working on a particular invention or in production activities.The main processes in this respect follow one of three common patterns: (1) interindustryjob mobility, (2) discovery of a new use, and (3) adaptation of technologies developed forother purposes. These processes will now be illustrated with a few examples of newcombinations created between the early 1970s and the late 1990s. Interindustry Job Mobility A common process through which new technology combinations were created is job mobility between different industries. To summarize, technically creative individualslacking the credentials or interest to climb a corporate ladder often changed jobs andindustrial sectors. For example, a machinist moved between the steel, chemical, andaerospace industries before spending some time in porcelain making and real estate. Amechanical engineer got his start in an ore processing plant and later worked for a carplant, a truck plant, and a plastic manufacturer. He summarized the comments of severalinterviewees by pointing out the following: “I was never able to stay more than two orthree years at the same place. After two or three years, I knew everything. I had doneeverything. I needed new challenges. I was soon looking elsewhere.” Job mobility in turn 4. See Desrochers’s (2000) doctoral dissertation for further justiﬁcation of the choice of individual inventors, along with more detailed descriptions of the sample characteristics, methodology, complete results, andlimitations of the study. In short, 45 Southern Quebec (Saint-Lawrence Valley) inventors were interviewedbetween 1997 and 1999 through a now defunct (and mostly) French-Canadian inventors association. Forty-three of the 45 interviewees were French-Canadians, a majority of which was, for cultural and linguisticreasons, reluctant to engage in long-distance business relationships with other individuals and businesses basedelsewhere in North America. Original quotes used in this essay were translated from the
basedelsewhere in North America. Original quotes used in this essay were translated from the (Quebec) French. 822 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
led to innovations in a new setting by building on past expertise. As the same engineer put it: “You always bring various experiences and know-how from one ﬁeld to anotherwhether in mining, plastic molding, car manufacturing. You need pumps, compressors,pipes, whatever ....Y o u c a n often apply something that you learned in one place to another.” Among other examples, a machinist working in a cement manufacturing plantsuggested a new way to clean tankers based on his previous experience in a newspaperprinting plant. Discovering a New Use Another frequent mechanism by which new knowledge entrepreneurial opportunities are created is the discovery of a new use for an existing product or set of skills (Minniti,2004; Shane, 2000). One individual adapted a signaling device he had created for a creditunion for use in the restaurant business. Another innovator modiﬁed a measuring device,incorporating a number of electronic components originally developed to assess carcrashes, in order to make it suitable for archeological excavations. In both cases, indi-viduals noticed a problem (the ﬁrst in person, the second while watching television) thatwas not directly affecting them, but for the solution of which they immediately saw apotential new use for one of their creations. Another innovator found that there was notmuch demand for a new type of ski rack he had designed for use in private homes, but thatpiling them on top of each other helped sporting goods store managers better display theirmerchandise. In this case, the suggestion came from a sporting equipment retailer whohad no real interest for the innovation’s original use, but who immediately saw how itmight prove useful to him. Adapting Technologies Developed for Other Purposes Many entrepreneurs adapted technologies they had observed in another setting. For example, one individual who was working on Christmas light decorations decided tocreate a Christmas tree made entirely of optical ﬁbers after visiting an optical
decided tocreate a Christmas tree made entirely of optical ﬁbers after visiting an optical ﬁber display.Another entrepreneur adapted an agricultural equipment device mechanism to create anew type of four-wheeled bicycle. A baby blanket/bag producer modeled her smallworkshop on the division of labor observed in the kitchen of a large restaurant owned byone of her friends. As one individual put it: “You always adapt things that you see in othersettings. Whether it is only a part of it or the whole thing, this happens every day ....Y o u see something and you go: “Great idea !...A n d then you incorporate it. It’s very com- m o n .... There is no point in reinventing the four-hole button. You must make the most out of what already exists.” Another entrepreneur concurs: “Sometimes I have ideas, butI don’t know how to realize them .... When I see something, I tell myself that this is what I would nee d...Ig oc o p y elsewher e...I don’t turn down what already exists, I won’t reinvent the wheel. It’s faster that way.” Of course, much development work often needsto be done once an idea for a new combination has been hit upon. The existence of industrial symbiosis and Jacobs externalities tends to show that the best context for entrepreneurship is a diverse environment where old ways of doing thingsare likely to nourish new discoveries. This fact argues in favor of policies that emphasizethe quality of the environment for entrepreneurship rather than planned regional special-ization. In order to explore this tentative conclusion further, we now turn to a moredetailed discussion of the role of the local environment and the importance of proximity. 823 September, 2008
On the Importance of Geographical Proximity The role played by local diversity in facilitating new combinations is multidimen- sional. First, local diversity matters in terms of the kind of work experience individualswho remain for a signiﬁcant period of time in a particular location are likely to acquire andin terms of the sectors in which they are likely to transfer or adapt it. 5For example, some interviewees had worked in the car assembly and supply parts industries and gainedspecialized knowledge in that environment before applying some of it to other lines ofwork. This sector, however, is to a large extent being phased out of the Quebec economy.It is therefore less likely to provide learning opportunities in years to come. On the otherhand, new sectors are emerging and are currently providing valuable know-how to anumber of creative individuals and would-be entrepreneurs. Another important dimension of local diversity is the network of experts and poten- tially knowledgeable people possessing the varied expertise that an individual builds overtime, both within particular ﬁrms and with various customers and suppliers, whicheventually act as either partners, occasional collaborators, mentors, or advisers. A recur-ring comment to that effect goes somewhat like this: I was looking for something thatwould do that. I talked about it to individual X. He thought about it for a while and saidthat I should look up that particular thing that can be found at this or that supplier ormanufacturer. Of course, sometimes plain luck—such as talking to a person sitting next toyou at a restaurant—also plays a role. The importance of geographical proximity for communicating speciﬁc features and for conducting numerous experiments to “get a product right” cannot be overemphasized.Even what looked like very simple plastic devices frequently required more than 30 sitevisits on the part of an innovator to a mold-making shop. An extreme case is the inventorof a new board game who
part of an innovator to a mold-making shop. An extreme case is the inventorof a new board game who claims that he had to meet his graphic designer more than 1,000times before a satisfactory result could be obtained. As could be expected, most entre-preneurs agreed that face-to-face communication between individuals possessing differentexpertise is even more crucial than for experts in the same ﬁeld (although the latter istypically considered very important) because they do not share a similar background andtechnical language. Face-to-face interaction was also deemed crucial to built trust rela-tionships and to select suppliers. The importance of proximity results from the nature of knowledge, or perhaps more accurately, know-how. While new communications means have dramatically improved theﬂow of information and facilitated business interactions, widely publicized reports on the“death of distance” are greatly exaggerated (Morgan, 2004). In short, as Hayek (1945)argued, much of the knowledge that makes markets work is difﬁcult to articulate andtherefore not easily transmissible. Similarly, in urban environments, the crucial knowl-edge is not explicit, formalized, and easy to communicate, but rather nonstandardized andembodied in human capital (Desrochers, 2001a; Desrochers & Sautet, 2004). This largelyintangible character of urban environments was described by Marshall (1890/1920, bookIV , chap. X, nonpaginated) as being “in the air” and producing the effect that “if one manstarts a new idea, it is taken up by others and combined with suggestions of their own; and 5. While it seems obvious that some minority linguistic regions dominated by one large manufacturing center (such as Quebec and many small European countries) are less conducive to geographical mobility than largeentities such as the United States, a case could probably be made that strong local ties, such as family andfriends, favor interindustrial job mobility, if only because individuals possessing
as family andfriends, favor interindustrial job mobility, if only because individuals possessing particular expertise might beless willing to move to other areas where there might be a demand for their particular skills after they have lostor quit their job. 824 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
thus it becomes the source of further new ideas.” Evidence seems to show that policy makers are not well placed to identify and enhance the ﬂows of tacit knowledge that makethe richness of prosperous urban centers for they lack the know-how, know-who, andexperience acquired over time and in different workplaces by entrepreneurs, managers,and technicians. Regional development policies often ignore the importance of knowledgeand its transmission. Instead, policies should focus on the quality of the institutionalcontext in order to enhance the chances for entrepreneurs to discover new combinationsand make the most of the knowledge lying around. We now turn to the importance of entrepreneurial activity in the emergence of diversiﬁed urban centers. The Entrepreneurial Process and Agglomeration Economies Many individuals involved in entrepreneurial ventures to create and market their innovations deemed traditional agglomeration economies extremely valuable. To illustratethat an innovative idea is but one step in the creation of a marketable product, consider asmall plastic ﬂask whose only originality lay in its design. Its creator credited his abilityto put his product on the market in a timely manner to the presence of the following localindividuals and ﬁrms who all relied on a diversiﬁed customer base to stay in business: anindustrial designer, a plastic molder, a plastic product specialist, a rope supplier, a capsupplier, a label maker, a shop to put everything together, a salesman, and a distributor.Countless examples such as these illustrate the truth of Thomas Edison’s alleged obser-vation that invention is 1% inspiration and 99% perspiration. Such entrepreneurial activi-ties, along with the important role played by urbanization economies in this context,however, are typically missing from recent discussions of “Jacobs externalities.” Building on the entrepreneurs study described earlier, and an eclectic literature review in several academic ﬁelds ranging from
study described earlier, and an eclectic literature review in several academic ﬁelds ranging from cognitive psychology to the history of technology,a case can be made that new technology combinations in the commercial realm typicallyoccur under the following, often nonmutually exclusive, circumstances: (1) in multidis-ciplinary teams working within a ﬁrm; (2) when employees add to, or switch, their productline; (3) when individuals observe a product/process in another setting and incorporate itinto their main activity; (4) when individuals move from one type of production toanother; and (5) when individuals possessing different skills and working for differentﬁrms collaborate with each other (Desrochers, 2001d). Most innovators who had lived in both a diversiﬁed city and an economically spe- cialized (i.e., monoindustrial or resource-based) region agreed that the former provided anenvironment that not only gave them the opportunity to see more problems, but also abetter opportunity to actually do something about them by providing easier access toa wider pool of expert knowledge and other resources. These observations supportMinguzzi and Passaro’s (2000, p. 181) suggestions that the cultural evolution processesobserved in small ﬁrms are “strongly inﬂuenced by the type of relationships that theyestablish with the economic environment” 6and that the resistance to change observed in some territorial and industrial contexts is often determined “by a cultural entrepreneurialhomogeneity.” This latter point was certainly obvious to Keir (1919, p. 47): 6. The economic environment as deﬁned by these authors is made up of the following actors: clients/ suppliers, competitors, central and local administration, and consultants. The “network of relations betweenthe ﬁrm and the market” is represented by factors such as changing combinations of the ﬁrm size, marketconditions, industry characteristics, and export processes. 825 September, 2008
From the point of view of employees, [geographically specialized] localization is bad because it also tends toward narrowing the minds of the townspeople. A young manbrought up in Fall River [Massachusetts], say, has but little choice of occupation; hemust become a weaver or a loom-ﬁxer or some other artisan connected with cottonmanufacture, because by upbringing, education and example he is forced into thatpath, and furthermore he goes to work at an early age. It may happen that many asquare peg is rammed into a round hole in this way, or a life constricted which mightunder better conditions have expanded. There is something deadening to the humanmind in uniformity; progress comes through variation, therefore in a town of oneindustry a young man loses the stimulus for self-advancement. Interestingly, Michael Porter (2000a, p. 24) seems to have caught on to this rationale when he argues that when individuals in a cluster share “a uniform approach to competing,a sort of groupthink often reinforces old behaviors, suppresses new ideas, and createsrigidities that prevent adoption of improvements.” “Clusters,” it turns out, might also “notsupport truly radical innovation, which tends to invalidate the existing pools of talent,information, suppliers, and infrastructure.” While in these circumstances a cluster partici-pant might not necessarily be worse off than an isolated ﬁrm because both can outsource,“the ﬁrm in an established cluster might suffer from greater barriers to perceiving the needto change and from inertia against severing past relationships that no longer contribute tocompetitive advantage.” As we have argued throughout the paper, much evidence suggests that the environ- ment in which entrepreneurs operate exerts much inﬂuence on their capacity to innovate.As William Baumol (1990) argued, the institutional environment has an impact on howsocially beneﬁcial entrepreneurial activity can be. We contend that policy strategies thatdeliberately reinforce regional
activity can be. We contend that policy strategies thatdeliberately reinforce regional specialization tend to impoverish the environment forentrepreneurs because they limit the probabilities of seeing and acting on new opportu-nities, whether through the development of new interindustrial linkages or new combina-tions. Entrepreneurial activity is at the source of diversiﬁed urban centers, which in turnbecome places where entrepreneurs often ﬁnd the most conducive substrate for theiractivities. While much historical evidence demonstrates that economic specializationemerges spontaneously, however, local economies that fail to diversify over time typicallydevelop much slower (if at all beyond a certain point) than local economies whereentrepreneurs constantly generate new activities, a point made several decades ago byChinitz (1961) in his comparative analysis of New York City and Pittsburgh. If, as theoryand evidence suggest, the context in which entrepreneurship develops matters most to thedevelopment of healthy economic regions, then the case for planned regional specializa-tion runs into problems which severely limit its potential success (Kirzner, 1979). Conclusion In the wake of the success of Michael Porter’s cluster strategy and a long-held belief that the geographical specialization of economic activities is a desirable outcome of tradeand the division of labor, regional development policy in the last two decades has heavilyfavored regional specialization at the expense of local economic diversity. While there isno doubt that the division of labor among individuals is beneﬁcial for society at large(although it should perhaps be thought of more often in terms of skills rather than ﬁnalproducts), the advantages of promoting regional specialization through public policyare less obvious. Indeed, much evidence suggests that specialization leaves regional 826 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
economies more likely to experience severe economic downturns and is less conducive to the development of symbiotic linkages between diverse ﬁrms (including recyclinglinkages). Furthermore, if innovation is understood as the socially beneﬁcial combination of previously unrelated things by entrepreneurs, it is likely that a more diversiﬁed environ-ment will increase the probability of combining existing skills and resources in differentconﬁgurations by offering a greater number and variety of problems to be solved, as wellas a much wider pool of expert knowledge and other useful resources to develop newsolutions. This result, in part, rests on the nature of knowledge and its transmission. Whatmatters to entrepreneurial discovery is not only explicit and easily transmissible knowl-edge, but also the knowledge that is tacit and harder to transmit. Proximity and diversityoffer the context for entrepreneurs to build on explicit and tacit knowledge so as to createnew combinations and thereby innovate. Much evidence conﬁrms the crucial importanceof agglomeration economies for innovative business start-ups. The speciﬁc impact of local diversity on entrepreneurial activities, however, is not as easily assessed as that of a regionally specialized industry. Most of the innovations andentrepreneurial acts documented in our study were built on the foundations of SouthernQuebec’s economic diversity, but drew on the kind of materials, devices, and expertisethat could be found in most important urban agglomerations (i.e., expertise in metals,plastics, electronic components, design, marketing, distribution, etc.). Be that as it may, itseems highly plausible that, as Aitken (1985, pp. 15–16) argued, “the points of conﬂuenceof information ﬂows deﬁne the social locations where there is a high probability of newcombinations being made.” All this is not to say, of course, that specialized districts or clusters are bad things. After all, their historical importance and prevalence over
districts or clusters are bad things. After all, their historical importance and prevalence over time clearly demonstrates theirintrinsic value. Furthermore, ﬁrms located in spatial concentrations of advanced technol-ogy activities do not constrain their knowledge inputs from within their local area(Breschi & Lissoni, 2001a; Britton, 2004) and it may be the case that much interindustrialcollaboration can be achieved over long distances. Nonetheless, it seems plausible tosuggest that face-to-face collaboration between individuals possessing different (explicitand tacit) knowledge bases might be even more useful than that between people sharinga similar professional background. In any case, if one recognizes some useful role forgeographical proximity in terms of generating innovative behavior, then a good regionalcontext for innovation would seem to be a diversiﬁed city made up of many specializedclusters—which is historically what most thriving cities have spontaneously developedinto. We believe the policy conclusion to be sufﬁciently robust. In most cases, what matters is the context in which entrepreneurship takes place rather than the type and form ofindustries that develop. General policies that enable inventors to become entrepreneurs byexploiting the commercial opportunities they have discovered are potentially the safestway to promote regional development—be it via diversiﬁcation or specialization. Thebirth, life, and death of diversiﬁed urban centers are essentially part of a spontaneous orderthat rests on entrepreneurship, as clustering and regional specialization are ultimately theresult of proﬁt-driven entrepreneurial activity. While we conclude that there seems to be no evidence to support regional special- ization policy, this does not necessarily mean that regional diversiﬁcation policies (what-ever they may be) would work. In the end, while we do not support the implementation ofpolicies that might foster the emergence of geographical agglomerations
the implementation ofpolicies that might foster the emergence of geographical agglomerations of diverse activ-ities, we claim that promoting policies that encourage regional specialization may lead tocounterproductive results. Indeed, it is difﬁcult, if not impossible, to engineer symbiotic 827 September, 2008
connections or knowledge spillovers between industries in a diverse environment. However, we make the case that purposefully promoting regional specialization at theexpense of spontaneously emerging diversity is most certainly wrongheaded. REFERENCES Aitken, H.J. (1985). The continuous wave: Technology and American radio 1900–1932 . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Algaze, G. (2005). The Sumerian takeoff. Structure and Dynamics: eJournal of Anthropological and Related Sciences 1 (1), article 2. Available at http://repositories.cdlib/imbs/socdyn/sdeas/vol1/iss1/art2, accessed 12 March 2008. Ayres, R.U. & Ayres, L.W. (2002). A handbook of industrial ecology . Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar. Babbage, C. (1832). On the economy of machinery and manufactures . Available at http:// socserv2.socsci.mcmaster.ca/~econ/ugcm/3ll3/babbage/index.html, accessed 12 March 2008. Bathelt, H. (2005). Geographies of production: Growth regimes in spatial perspective (II)—knowledge creation and growth in clusters. Progress in Human Geography ,29(2), 204–216. Bathelt, H., Malmberg, A., & Maskell, P. (2004). Clusters and knowledge: Local buzz, global pipelines and the process of knowledge creation. Progress in Human Geography ,28(1), 31–56. Baumol, W. (1990). Entrepreneurship: Productive, unproductive, and destructive. The Journal of Political Economy ,98(5), 893–921. Beer, J.J. (1981). The emergence of the German dye industry . New York: Arno Press (Original work published 1959). Breschi, S. & Lissoni, F. (2001a). Localised knowledge spillovers vs innovative milieux: Knowledge “tacit- ness” reconsidered. Papers in Regional Science ,80(3), 255–273. Breschi, S. & Lissoni, F. (2001b). Knowledge spillovers and local innovation systems: A critical survey. Industrial and Corporate Change ,10(4), 975–1005. Britton, J.H. (2004). High technology localization and extra-regional networks. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development ,16(5), 369–390. Brown, K.A. (1988). Inventors at work.
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development ,16(5), 369–390. Brown, K.A. (1988). Inventors at work. Interviews with 16 notable American inventors . Redmond, WA: Tempus Book of Microsoft Press. Bunker, S.G. & Ciccantell, P.S. (2005). Globalization and the race for resources . Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. Chapman, K. (2005). From “growth centre” to “cluster”: Restructuring, regional development, and the teesside chemical industry. Environment and Planning A ,37(4), 597–615. Chapman, K. & Walker, D. (1987). Industrial location . Oxford: Basil Blackwell. Chertow, M. (2000). Industrial symbiosis: Literature and taxonomy. Annual Review of Energy and the Environment ,25, 313–337. Chinitz, B. (1961). Contrasts in agglomeration: New York and Pittsburgh. American Economic Review ,51(2), 279–289. 828 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Chiu, A.S. (2002). Ecology, systems, and networking. Walking the talk in Asia. Journal of Industrial Ecology , 5(2), 6–8. Cortright, J. (2006). Making sense of clusters: Regional competitiveness and economic development . Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. Available at: http://www.brookings.edu/metro/mei/ 20060727_clusters.htm, accessed 12 March 2008. Desrochers, P. (2000). De l’inﬂuence d’une ville diversiﬁée sur la combinaison de techniques. Typologie et analyse de processus . PhD dissertation, Department of Geography, Université de Montréal. Desrochers, P. (2001a). Geographical proximity and the transmission of tacit knowledge. Review of Austrian Economics ,14(1), 63–83. Desrochers, P. (2001b). Cities and industrial symbiosis: Some historical perspective and policy implications. Journal of Industrial Ecology ,5(4), 29–44. Desrochers, P. (2001c). Eco-industrial parks: The case for private planning. The Independent Review: A Journal of Political Economy ,5(3), 345–371. Desrochers, P. (2001d). Local diversity, human creativity and technological innovation. Growth and Change , 32(3), 369–394. Desrochers, P. (2002a). Regional development and inter-industry recycling linkages: Some historical perspec- tive. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development ,14(1), 49–65. Desrochers, P. (2002b). Industrial ecology and the rediscovery of inter-ﬁrm recycling linkages: Historical evidence and policy implications. Industrial and Corporate Change ,11(5), 1031–1057. Desrochers, P. (2007). How did the invisible hand handle industrial waste? By-product development before the modern environmental era. Enterprise and Society ,8(2), 348–374. Desrochers, P. & Sautet, F. (2004). Cluster-based economic strategy, facilitation policy and the market process. Review of Austrian Economics ,17(2/3), 233–245. Desrochers, P. & Hospers, G.-J. (2007). Cities and the economic development of nations: An essay on Jane Jacobs’ contribution to economic theory. Canadian Journal of Regional Science
An essay on Jane Jacobs’ contribution to economic theory. Canadian Journal of Regional Science ,30(1), 115– 130. Deutz, P. & Gibbs, D. (2004). Eco-industrial development and economic development: Industrial ecology or place promotion? Business Strategy and the Environment ,13(5), 346–362. Devas, C.S. (1901). Political economy (2nd ed., rewritten and enlarged). London: Longmans, Green, and Co. Dicken, P. & Lloyd, P. (1990). Location in space. Theoretical perspectives in economic geography (3rd ed.). New York: Harper Collins Publishers Inc. Duranton, G. & Puga, D. (2000). Diversity and specialisation in cities: Why, where and when does it matter? Urban Studies ,37(3), 533–555. Feldman, M. (2000). Location and innovation: The new economic geography of innovation, spillovers and agglomeration. In G.L. Clark, M.P. Feldman, & M.S. Gertler (Eds.), Oxford handbook of economic geography (pp. 373–394). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Garner, A. & Keoleian, G.A. (1995). Industrial ecology: An introduction . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, National Pollution Prevention Center for Higher Education. Glaeser, E., Kallal, H., Scheinkman, J., & Shleifer, A. (1992). Growth in cities. Journal of Political Economy , 100(6), 1126–1152. 829 September, 2008
Goldfarb, B. (2005). Diffusion of general-purpose technologies: Understanding patterns in the electriﬁcation of US manufacturing 1880–1930. Industrial and Corporate Change ,14(5), 745–773. Hansen, N. (1996). Regional development policies: Past problems and future possibilities. Canadian Journal of Regional Science ,19(1), 107–118. Available at http://www.lib.unb.ca/Texts/CJRS/bin/get.cgi? directory=Spring96/&ﬁlename=HANSEN.htm, accessed 12 March 2008. Hansen, N. (2002). Dynamic externalities and spatial innovation diffusion: Implications for peripheral regions. International Journal of Technology, Policy and Management ,2(3), 260–271. Hayek, F.A. (1945). The use of knowledge in society. American Economic Review ,35(4), 519–30. (Reprinted inIndividualism and Economic Order , 1948. Chicago: University of Chicago Press) Hoover, E.M. & Giarratani, F. (1984). An introduction to regional economics (3rd ed.). New York: Alfred A. Knopf. Hounshell, D. (1991/1984). From the American system to mass production, 1800–1932 . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Jacobs, J. (1969). The economy of cities . New York: Random House. Jacobsen, N.B. (2006). Industrial symbiosis in Kalundborg, Denmark. A quantitative assessment of economic and environmental aspects. Journal of Industrial Ecology ,10(1/2), 239–255. Jacobsen, N.B. & Anderberg, S. (2004). Understanding the evolution of industrial symbiotic networks. In J. van den Bergh & M.A. Janssen (Eds.), Economics of industrial ecology. Materials, structural change, and spatial scales (pp. 313–335). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. Jung, A. (2005). The box that makes the world go round. Special Spiegel International Edition . Available at http://www.spiegel.de/international/spiegel/0,1518,386799,00.html, accessed 21 July 2008. Keir, M. (1919). The localization of industry. How it starts; why it grows and persists. The Scientiﬁc Monthly , 8(1), 32–48. Kershaw, J.B.C. (1928). The recovery and use of industrial and other waste . London:
, 8(1), 32–48. Kershaw, J.B.C. (1928). The recovery and use of industrial and other waste . London: Ernest Benn Limited. Khan, J.H. & Ghani, J.A. (2004). Clusters and entrepreneurship: Implications for innovation in a developing economy. Journal of Development Entrepreneurship ,9(3), 221–238. Kirzner, I.M. (1979, February). The perils of regulation: A market-process approach. Occasional paper of the Law and Economics Center, University of Miami School of Law. (Reprinted in Discovery and the capitalist process . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985) Koller, T. (1918). The utilization of waste products: A treatise on the rational utilization, recovery, and treatment of waste products of all kinds (3rd revised ed., translated from the 2nd revised German ed.). New York: D. Van Nostrand Company. Lipsett, C. (1963/1951). Industrial wastes and salvage. Conservation and utilization . New York: The Atlas Publishing Co., Inc. Lowe, E.A. (1995, May 4–5). The Eco-Industrial Park: A business environment for a sustainable future. Paper presented at the conference Designing, Financing, and Building the Industrial Park of the Future, sponsoredby the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Institute, and the University of California at San Diego, San Diego. Malizia, E.E. & Feser, E.J. (1999). Understanding local economic development . New Brunswick, NJ: Center for Urban Policy Research, Rutgers University. 830 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Marshall, A. (1920). Principles of economics (8th ed.). London: MacMillan. Available at http:// www.econlib.org/library/Marshall/marP.html, accessed 12 March 2008. (Original work published 1890) Marx, K. (1894). CAPITAL, volume III: The process of capitalist production as a whole . Available at http://www.econlib.org/library/YPDBooks/Marx/mrxCpC5.html#Part%20I,%20Chapter%205, accessed 10 August, 2006. Minguzzi, A. & Passaro, R. (2000). The network of relationships between the economic environment and the entrepreneurial culture in small ﬁrms. Journal of Business Venturing ,16(1), 181–207. Minniti, M. (2004). Organization alertness and asymmetric information in a spin-glass model. Journal of Business Venturing ,19(5), 637–658. Morgan, K. (2004). The exaggerated death of geography: Learning, proximity and territorial innovation systems. Journal of Economic Geography ,4(1), 3–21. Polese, M. (2005). Cities and national economic growth: A reappraisal. Urban Studies ,42(8), 1429–1451. Porter, M. (1990). The competitive advantage of nations . London: Macmillan. Porter, M. (1998). Location, clusters and the “new” microeconomics of competition. Business Economics , 33(1), 7–17. Porter, M. (2000a). Location, competition, and economic development: Local clusters in a global economy. Economic Development Quarterly ,14(1), 15–34. Porter, M. (2000b). Location, clusters and company strategy. In G.L. Clark, M.S. Gertler, & M.P. Feldman (Eds.). The Oxford handbook of economic geography (pp. 253–274). New York: Oxford University Press. Quigley, J.M. (1998). Urban diversity and economic growth. Journal of Economic Perspectives ,12(2), 127–138. Renner, G.T. (1947). Geography of industrial localization. Economic Geography ,23(3), 167–189. Ricardo, D. (1821). The principles of political economy and taxation (3rd ed). London: John Murray. Available at: http://www.econlib.org/library/Ricardo/ricP.html, accessed 12 March 2008. (Original work pub-lished 1817) Rocha, H.O. (2004).
accessed 12 March 2008. (Original work pub-lished 1817) Rocha, H.O. (2004). Entrepreneurship and development: The role of clusters. Small Business Economics , 23(5), 363–400. Rocha, H.O. & Sternberg, R. (2005). Entrepreneurship: The role of clusters. Theoretical perspectives and empirical evidence from Germany. Small Business Economics ,24(3), 267–292. Rogers, J.E.T. (1884). Six centuries of work and wages: The history of English labour . (Reprint 2001 by Batoche Books. Available at http://socserv2.socsci.mcmaster.ca/~econ/ugcm/3ll3/rogers/sixcenturies.pdf, Accessed 12 March 2008) Rosenfeld, S. (2001, March 29–30). Backing into clusters: Retroﬁtting public policies. Paper presented at the Integration Pressures: Lessons from Around the World, John F. Kennedy School Symposium, HarvardUniversity. Available at: http://www.rtsinc.org/publications/Harvard4%20doc%20copy.pdf, accessed 12 March 2008. Rosenthal, S.S. & Strange, W. (2004). Evidence on the nature and sources of agglomeration economies. In V . Henderson & J. Thisse (Eds.). Handbook of urban and regional economics, volume 4 (pp. 2119–2172). New York: Elsevier. Ross, E.A. (1896). The location of industries. Quarterly Journal of Economics ,10(2), 247–268. 831 September, 2008
Shane, S. (2000). Prior knowledge, and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities. Organization Science , 11(4), 448–469. Siegel, P.B., Johnson, T.G., & Alwang, J. (1995). Regional economic diversity and diversiﬁcation: Seeking a framework for analysis. Growth and Change ,26(2), 261–284. Simmonds, P.L. (1876/1873). Waste products and undeveloped substances: A synopsis of progress made in their economic utilisation during the last quarter of a century at home and abroad (3rd ed.). London: Hardwicke and Bogue. Smil, V . (2005). Creating the twentieth century . New York: Oxford University Press. Talbot, F.A. (1920). Millions from waste . Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Company. Unger, R.M. (2007). Free trade reimagined: The world division of labor and the method of economics . Princeton: Princeton University Press. van der Panne, G. & van Beers, C. (2006). On the Marshall-Jacobs controversy: It takes two to tango. Industrial and Corporate Change ,15(5), 877–890. Wheeler, J.O., Muller, P.O., Thrall, G.I., & Fink, T.J. (1998). Economic geography . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Wolf, A., Eklund, M., & Söderström, M. (2007). Developing integration in a local industrial system—an explorative approach. Business Strategy and the Environment ,16(6), 442–455. Pierre Desrochers is at Department of Geography, University of Toronto Mississauga, 3359 Mississauga Road North, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada. Frederic Sautet is at The Mercatus Center at George Mason University, North Fairfax Drive, Arlington, V A, USA. The authors acknowledge funding for the research that led to this paper was provided by the Fonds pour la formation de chercheurs et l’aide à la recherche (Government of Québec), the Social Sciences and HumanitiesResearch Council (Government of Canada), and the Koch Foundation. 832 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Entrepreneurial Policy: The Case of RegionalSpecialization vs.Spontaneous IndustrialDiversity Pierre Desrochers Frederic Sautet Regional economic development policy is recognized as a key tool governments use to foster economic prosperity. Whether specialization (or diversity) of economic activitiesshould be a regional development policy goal is often debated. We address this question ina local-diversity context, by reviewing traditional arguments in its favor, supplemented withevidence for more entrepreneurial concepts like industrial symbiosis and Jacobs exter-nalities. We show that the context of entrepreneurship matters more to policy than the typeand form of resulting industries. Policies enabling entrepreneurs to exploit opportunities ina context of spontaneously evolved industrial diversity are better facilitators of regionaldevelopment. Introduction Regional development prescriptions based on the promotion of geographically local- ized, related, and interdependent ﬁrms can be traced back at least to the “growth pole,”“growth center,” and “industrial complex” strategies implemented in numerous countriesin the 1960s and 1970s. While the main goals of these policies were to create agglom-eration economies (or “external economies of scale”) and to increase productivity, morerecent approaches—with Michael Porter’s (1990) cluster strategy being by far the mostinﬂuential—have emphasized the positive impact that a regional context made up ofgeographically proximate and industry-related ﬁrms and institutions can have on entre-preneurial and innovative activities. While the cluster strategy has been criticized onseveral counts, ranging from its fuzziness to its status as a rationale for supportingpolitically favored industries (Bathelt, 2005; Desrochers & Sautet, 2004; Rocha, 2004), ithas nonetheless successfully overturned the previously prevalent diversiﬁcation objectiveof most local development ofﬁcials and established regional specialization as the preferredgoal
most local development ofﬁcials and established regional specialization as the preferredgoal (Rosenfeld, 2001). Please send correspondence to: Pierre Desrochers, tel.: (905) 828-5206; e-mail: pierre.desrochers@ utoronto.ca, to Frederic Sautet at fsautet@gmu.edu.PTE&1042-2587 © 2008 Baylor University 813 September, 2008
As Rocha and Sternberg (2005, p. 267) point out, however, research on the impact of local conditions on entrepreneurial behavior remains theoretically and empirically scarcedue to “conceptual, theoretical, and methodological limitations.” Taking a broad view ofentrepreneurial activities, which it deﬁnes as the creation of new economic activities andthe pursuit of innovation, this essay aims to address this issue by suggesting that a“successful” policy push toward specialization might contain the seeds of its own demiseby leaving regional economies more vulnerable to cyclical downturns and less likely tosupport the emergence of innovative practices and behavior, such as the development ofinterindustry linkages and new combinations of existing technologies and materials(“Jacobs externalities”). 1 The issue is not that regional specialization policies are developed at the expense of spontaneous industrial diversity. Indeed, the two can coexist. Rather, we argue thatentrepreneurial activity is at the source of regional development and that theory andevidence seem to indicate that spontaneously developed industrial and economic localdiversity typically provide a better substrate for entrepreneurs to innovate. While we donot argue the pursuit of diversity as a policy goal, we strongly emphasize the limits andproblems inherent to regional specialization strategies by pointing out that a diverseenvironment is often a necessary precondition for the spontaneous emergence of diverselocal specializations. The paper is structured as follows. The ﬁrst section reviews the main points of contention in a long-standing debate among academics, local development professionals,members of local business associations, and policy makers as to the respective advan-tages and pitfalls of the regional specialization and diversity of economic activities. Thesecond section brieﬂy evaluates whether planned regional specialization efforts, byfar the most dominant perspective in recent years, have --- opposed to the traditional free-trade perspective, on the grounds that political institutions should shapemarkets and that diversity matters more than efﬁciency. See Roberto Mangabeira Unger (2007) for instance. 815 September, 2008
planned regional specialization efforts, byfar the most dominant perspective in recent years, have been successful. The remainderof the paper discusses four arguments that limit the case in favor of publicly plannedregional specialization: (1) interindustrial linkages and industrial symbiosis (i.e., wasterecovery linkages between different industries), (2) Jacobs externalities (i.e., knowledgespillovers between different industries), (3) local environment and proximity, and (4) therole of entrepreneurship. This essay supplements the current literature on these topics in two ways. First, we survey a now largely forgotten body of historical evidence on by-product developmentthat both supports the widespread nature of industrial symbiosis and discusses its rationalefrom the entrepreneur’s perspective. We then describe how Jacobs externalities actuallyoccur by synthesizing the main patterns of outcome observed in a qualitative survey ofFrench-Canadian entrepreneurs. This material leads us to conclude that the regionalsetting most conducive to entrepreneurial activity is probably a diversiﬁed city made up ofmany specialized clusters, which is what most thriving cities have historically spontane-ously evolved into. Regional Specialization as Economic Policy The geographical concentration of related manufacturing and service ﬁrms is prob- ably as old as economic development. For example, Rogers (1884) refers to a document 1. In the following pages, we use Joseph Schumpeter’s distinction between invention and innovation: An innovation is a socially beneﬁcial invention. From this perspective, an innovator is also necessarily anentrepreneur. However, an entrepreneur is not necessarily an innovator. 814 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
published around the year 1250 that documents the following localized English indu- stries: schooling (Oxford), eels (Cambridge), scarlet (Lincoln), blanket (Bligh), burnet(Beverley), russet (Colchester), linen fabrics (Shaftesbury, Lewes, Aylesham), cord(Warwick, Bridport), hempen fabrics (Bridport), ﬁne bread (Wycombe, Hungerford,St. Albans), knives (Maxstead), needles (Wilton), razors (Leicester), etc. In later centuries, such geographical concentrations of economic activities would often be explained by applying the law of comparative advantage (Ricardo, 1817/1821) atthe subnational level. In short, by specializing in the production of one type of good (e.g.,automobile production) or one set of related goods (e.g., transportation equipment) forwhich they have a relative advantage (in terms of opportunity costs of producing thegood), urban agglomerations or larger regions are made better off than if they only haveaccess to autarkic production. This is said to be true whether a region or a city has anabsolute advantage in only one good (the one it specializes in) or has an absoluteadvantage in the production of every good—as long as differences in opportunity costs inproduction make it advantageous for the city to specialize. 2Not surprisingly, policy makers have long attempted to promote the development of what have most famouslybeen labeled “industrial districts” (Marshall, 1890/1920). Perhaps the earliest interven-tions in this respect involved immigration policy. As Marshall (1890/1920, book 4, chap.10, nonpaginated) observed several decades ago: Very often the rulers deliberately invited artisans from a distance and settled them in a group together. Thus the mechanical faculty of Lancashire is said to be due to theinﬂuence of Norman smiths who were settled at Warrington by Hugo de Lupus inWilliam the Conqueror’s time. And the greater part of England’s manufacturingindustry before the era of cotton and steam had its course directed by settlements ofFlemish and --- before the era of cotton and steam had its course directed by settlements ofFlemish and other artisans; many of which were made under the immediate directionof Plantagenet and Tudor kings. These immigrants taught us how to weave woollenand worsted stuffs, though for a long time we sent our cloths to the Netherlands to befulled and dyed. They taught us how to cure herrings, how to manufacture silk, howto make lace, glass, and paper, and to provide for many other of our wants. In the more recent past, policy prescriptions based on the promotion of geographically localized, related, and interdependent ﬁrms have included the “growth pole,” “growthcenter,” and “industrial complex” strategies implemented in numerous countries in the1960s and 1970s (Chapman, 2005; Chapman & Walker, 1987; Hansen, 1996; Rocha,2004; Wheeler, Muller, Thrall, & Fink, 1998). In short, growth pole strategies werecentered around “clusters of industries” (Chapman & Walker, 1987, p. 216), including atleast one “propulsive sector” that was said to quickly develop the main characteristics ofmodern large-scale industry and, being in an early stage of the product cycle, had highergrowth potential than average for manufacturing. Because of its size, importance, andinterconnections with other “affected industries” and activities, this key industry’s growthbeneﬁted the local area through increased employment, purchasing power, and the attrac-tion of other economic activities. Although the concept was originally dynamic and linkedto innovation, in practice it was often restricted by “reliance on input–output analysis anda focus on large industries” (Chapman & Walker). Growth centers, for their part, were 2. Ricardo and later mainstream economists assumed that only production costs mattered and ignored transportation costs. In recent years, the law of comparative advantage has been challenged by some econo-mists opposed to the traditional free-trade perspective, on the grounds that political institutions
essentially means of organizing public infrastructure more efﬁciently by concentrating them geographically, a process which typically generated much political opposition frominhabitants of nonfavored areas. Finally, industrial complex strategies consisted of studieslooking “at the location of a group of interrelated industries, looking at interconnections,the relative advantage of each component parts, and the attraction of locating a complexwith or without its various component parts (Chapman & Walker, p. 217). While the main goals of these policies were to create agglomeration economies and to increase productivity, more recent approaches—the most prominent being by farPorter’s (1990, 1998, 2000a, 2000b) cluster strategy which revolves around the promotionand reinforcement of “a geographically proximate group of interconnected companies andassociated institutions in a particular ﬁeld, linked by commonalities and complementari-ties (2000a: 16)”—have emphasized the positive impact that a regional context made upof geographically proximate and industry-related ﬁrms and institutions can have oninnovative activities (Bathelt, Malmberg, & Maskell, 2004; Cortright, 2006; Khan &Ghani, 2004; Rocha, 2004). Spatial economic analysts have also long described the importance of some positive externalities such as localization economies that occur when ﬁrms involved in the sameline of business are in close geographical proximity, allowing them to beneﬁt from assetsharing, common labor pooling, better access to intermediate inputs, increased face-to-face communication (which facilitates the communication of tacit knowledge and thedevelopment of trust-based relationships), and knowledge spillovers on related technolo-gies (Marshall, 1890/1920; Rosenthal & Strange, 2004). Traditional Case against Regional Specialization The idea that government-led regional specialization delivers the results claimed by its supporters has been challenged on several counts. A main theoretical --- districts or clusters are bad things. After all, their historical importance and prevalence over time clearly demonstrates theirintrinsic value. Furthermore, ﬁrms located in spatial concentrations of advanced technol-ogy activities do not constrain their knowledge inputs from within their local area(Breschi & Lissoni, 2001a; Britton, 2004) and it may be the case that much interindustrialcollaboration can be achieved over long distances. Nonetheless, it seems plausible tosuggest that face-to-face collaboration between individuals possessing different (explicitand tacit) knowledge bases might be even more useful than that between people sharinga similar professional background. In any case, if one recognizes some useful role forgeographical proximity in terms of generating innovative behavior, then a good regionalcontext for innovation would seem to be a diversiﬁed city made up of many specializedclusters—which is historically what most thriving cities have spontaneously developedinto. We believe the policy conclusion to be sufﬁciently robust. In most cases, what matters is the context in which entrepreneurship takes place rather than the type and form ofindustries that develop. General policies that enable inventors to become entrepreneurs byexploiting the commercial opportunities they have discovered are potentially the safestway to promote regional development—be it via diversiﬁcation or specialization. Thebirth, life, and death of diversiﬁed urban centers are essentially part of a spontaneous orderthat rests on entrepreneurship, as clustering and regional specialization are ultimately theresult of proﬁt-driven entrepreneurial activity. While we conclude that there seems to be no evidence to support regional special- ization policy, this does not necessarily mean that regional diversiﬁcation policies (what-ever they may be) would work. In the end, while we do not support the implementation ofpolicies that might foster the emergence of geographical agglomerations
the results claimed by its supporters has been challenged on several counts. A main theoretical argument in thisrespect invokes another class of externalities, urbanization economies, by which thegeographical concentration of a wide variety of ﬁrms generates signiﬁcant beneﬁts acrossdifferent lines of work. For example, software engineering, accounting, advertising,manpower, and catering ﬁrms, among many others, can often serve a different array ofcustomers in a particular geographical area better and/or cheaper than if these ﬁrms weremaintaining these functions within their corporate structure. Transport infrastructures,such as ports and airports, also beneﬁt a wide array of localized businesses. A diversiﬁedlocal economic structure is also believed to generate a greater “multiplier” effect whennew productive activities are added to the local mix, in the process providing newcustomers to a whole range of (as opposed to a few) local producers (Dicken & Lloyd,1990; Hoover & Giarratani, 1984; Wheeler et al., 1998). Another argument rests on the fact that diversiﬁed local economies have always been more stable and resilient than highly specialized regions whose fates rested on theultimately temporary demand for a particular type of good or service (Chapman, 2005).This was certainly obvious to Alfred Marshall (1890/1920, book 4, chap. 10, nonpagi-nated) who observed that “a district which is dependent chieﬂy on one industry is liableto extreme depression, in case of a falling-off in the demand for its produce, or of a failurein the supply of the raw material which it uses,” but that this problem was “in a greatmeasure avoided by those large towns or large industrial districts in which several distinctindustries are strongly developed.” His contemporary, Malcom Keir (1919, p. 47), simi-larly wrote that few places were harder hit during difﬁcult times than “every town whoseindustries are not diversiﬁed.” 816 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE --- Many studies have tried to estimate the extent, magnitude, and respective importance of localization and urbanization economies, but these measurements have always beenproblematic (Rosenthal & Strange, 2004; Siegel, Johnson, & Alwang, 1995), as hasbeen the development of a workable concept of diversity. Indeed, according to Malizia andFeser (1999, p. 92), economic diversity can only be deﬁned operationally as the presenceof multiple specializations, a point that has always resulted in much analytical confusion.Furthermore, as Rocha and Sternberg (2005, p. 267) point out, while research on theimpact of local conditions on entrepreneurial behavior remains both theoretically andempirically scarce due to a number of methodological, theoretical, and conceptual limi-tations, entrepreneurship and clusters are themselves “complex phenomena that defydeﬁnition, which in turn undermines theory building and testing.” Be that as it may,econometric studies supporting either the beneﬁts of specialization or diversity can befound (Polese, 2005). In spite of the theoretical and empirical difﬁculties to establish the actual impact of regional specialization on entrepreneurial behavior, we believe that another set of argu-ments can be used to evaluate the rationale underlying policy efforts to promote andreinforce the regional specialization of speciﬁc lines of work. Our case rests on the ideathat economies, regions, and cities are self-organizing systems driven by entrepreneurialand innovative behavior, which is itself more likely to be stimulated in a more (as opposedto less) diverse environment. This idea will be explored in the context of four speciﬁcissues: (1) interindustrial recovery linkages, (2) Jacobs externalities, (3) the role of thelocal environment, and (4) the role of entrepreneurial activity. Interindustrial Recovery Linkages Urbanization economies can take many forms, including linkages between different types of industry that are created by entrepreneurs in order to
linkages between different types of industry that are created by entrepreneurs in order to turn the industrial waste ofone into the valuable input of another. While the phenomenon was identiﬁed long ago(Renner, 1947), it was not until the last two decades that it began to generate sustainedacademic interest under the broad interdisciplinary umbrella known as “industrialecology” (Ayres & Ayres, 2002). Industrial ecologists’ core insight is a simple one: Whycould our industrial system not behave more like an ecosystem where the waste of onespecies is the vital input of another? Interestingly, some of them have looked into thephysical exchange of materials, energy, water, and by-products among geographicallyproximate, but diverse, factories and plants, a phenomenon eventually labeled “industrialsymbiosis” (Chertow, 2000). In its current incarnation, industrial symbiosis ﬁrst gained attention at the turn of the 1990s after Danish teenagers working on a high-school project noticed numerous waste-recycling linkages in their small, but economically diversiﬁed, hometown of Kalundborg.Further research later revealed that the city and its surrounding region were hosts tonumerous water (seven), energy (six), and solid waste (six) symbiotic relationships(Jacobsen, 2006; Jacobsen & Anderberg, 2004). Among the entrepreneurial actions thatcreated these linkages in the last four decades are the following. In 1972, a pipeline wasinstalled that brought an excess amount of gas from the local Statoil reﬁnery (that wouldhave otherwise been burned as waste) to a Gyproc plaster board factory to dry theirproduction. Following the ﬁrst oil crisis, Danish power stations converted from oil to coal,in the process generating a large amount of ﬂy ash, which the Kalundborg Asnæs stationmanagers sold to cement companies. In 1976, managers at a local Novo Nordisk plant thatproduced insulin and industrial enzymes began selling its sludge-like biomass made up of 817 September, 2008 --- dead microorganisms to local farmers for use as fertilizer. A few years later, power station employees made an arrangement to get their hands on the reﬁnery’s spent cooling waterwhen they needed to expand their operations. Figure 1 describes most current linkages. Perhaps the most striking feature of the Kalundborg case was that these spontaneous developments resulted from decentralized entrepreneurial actions that built on readilyexisting industrial diversity. Jorgen Christensen, a spokesperson for Novo Nordisk, wasexplicit on this point: “We didn’t design the whole thing. It wasn’t designed at all. Ithappened over time” (quoted in Lowe, 1995, p. 15). Henning Grann, a Statoil employee,reinforces the point: “The symbiosis project is originally not the result of a carefulenvironmental planning process. It is rather the result of a gradual development ofcooperation between four neighbouring industries and the Kalundborg municipality”(quoted in Garner & Keoleian, 1995, p. 28). In each case, some local managers andentrepreneurs were confronted with a particular problem—either the (often costly) dis-posal of potentially valuable resources or the constant need for better and/or cheaperinputs—and saw opportunities in the local diversiﬁed economy to improve the competi-tive stance of their operations. Knowledge about the Kalundborg case inspired further research and the later “discovery” of similar spontaneous linkages in various regions of Europe and theUnited States (Desrochers, 2001b, 2002a; Wolf, Eklund, & Söderström, 2007). DespiteFigure 1 The Kalundborg Industrial Symbiosis (2002) Source: Jacobsen (2006, p. 242) 818 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
widespread beliefs as to the novel character of such linkages (Desrochers, 2002b), much historical evidence suggests that they are probably as old as economic development andhave certainly been widespread in all advanced economies in the last two centuries.Perhaps the best sources on the topic are a number of now largely forgotten compendiumswhose aim was to provide concise overviews of the technical literature of their time bydocumenting thousands of proﬁtable waste-recovery cases (Desrochers, 2007; Kershaw,1928; Koller, 1918; Lipsett, 1963; Simmonds, 1876). Whereas covering the entrepreneurial history behind successful attempts to turn wastes into by-products is beyond the scope of this paper, Talbot (1920, pp. 17–18)perhaps best summarized the dominant opinion on the topic in the late nineteenth andearly twentieth century when he observed that “to relate all the fortunes which have beenamassed from the commercialization of what was once rejected and valueless wouldrequire a volume” and that this would be “a story of fascinating romance and one difﬁcultto parallel in the whole realm of human activity.” Indeed, Karl Marx (1894 , V ol. 3, part1, chap. 5, nonpaginated) shared this assessment when he wrote that capitalism extended“the utilisation of the excretions of production and consumption” and that the “so-calledwaste plays an important role in almost every industry.” Several past commentators observed that the development of by-products, especially those that were difﬁcult and/or costly to transport, often reinforced agglomerative ten-dencies. Ross (1896, p. 256) explained the geographical concentration of industries atleast in part by “the cluster of side industries that grow up about packing establishments,reﬁneries, or gasworks, engaged in turning refuse into by-products,” while Devas (1901,p. 98) highlighted the role of the “greater growth of subsidiary industries, such namelyas supply materials and utilize refuse, to do which for a single factory would not --- such namelyas supply materials and utilize refuse, to do which for a single factory would not beworthwhile.” Talbot (1920, p. 303) pointed out that, in order to be successful, “co-operative and individual methods [of resource recovery ]...c a n only be conducted upon the requisite scale in the very largest cities where the volume of material to be handled isrelatively heavy” because “waste must be forthcoming in a steady stream of uniformvolume to justify its exploitation, and the fashioning and maintenance of these streams isthe supreme difﬁculty.” Keir (1919, pp. 39–40) similarly wrote that localization “attracts to itself plants whose business is the utilization of waste products” and that, for the factories, “the presence ofthe waste-using shops turns a loss into a proﬁt, a charge into a credit or a liability into anasset.” He observed that each additional recovery plant added “an increment to theimportance of a locality as the center of an industry,” for “by transforming liabilities intoassets, and turning costs into proﬁts,” they aided “in the defense of the community againstthe onslaughts of outside competition” and therefore augmented “the growth of theindustry in the location where it is already rooted.” He illustrated these processes with various cases, such as a great cement plant in Bufﬁngton, Indiana, that fed upon the slag (“the scum of impurities taken from the orewhen it is melted”) of the largest steel mill in the United States located in the nearbytown of Gary; the cap shops of New York City that were usually located next door toclothing factories in order to have easy access to their remnants; a glue and mucilagemanufacturer in Gloucester, Massachusetts, whose main input was the heads and tails ofﬁsh from what was then one of the most important ﬁshing ports in the world; and a“brass laundry” in Waterbury, Connecticut, whose employees recovered machine shopoil and separated brass from other materials collected from nearby businesses. Again, ineach
shopoil and separated brass from other materials collected from nearby businesses. Again, ineach case, creative and entrepreneurial individuals saw opportunities in problematicsituations and ended up creating what are now typically referred to as economy-environment “win-win” situations. 819 September, 2008
The recent rediscovery of industrial symbiosis paved the way for a few planning exercises through which public ofﬁcials attempted to replicate the Kalundborg experience.While so-called “eco-industrial parks” are most likely unsound in theory (Desrochers,2001c) and have typically failed to live up to expectations in practice (Deutz & Gibbs,2004), their planning stage has nonetheless highlighted the fact that specialization-oriented cluster development is fundamentally incompatible with the spontaneous emer-gence of industrial symbiosis through decentralized entrepreneurial initiatives. As Chiu(2002) observes in the context of Asian initiatives in this respect, many investors com-plained that they were not allowed to pick their preferred location, while many estatemanagers claimed that they could not select the right industrial mix to further localeconomic development and symbiotic linkages. The evidence seems to show that interindustrial recovery linkages emerge spontane- ously shaped by the forces of entrepreneurial innovation. While industrial parks, growthpoles, and other policies may vary signiﬁcantly in the magnitude of their impact on localeconomies, we are not so much concerned in this paper with their relative effect, but ratherwith the idea that there exist better ways to foster local innovation and entrepreneurshipthan policies that deliberately aim to foster the regional specialization of economicactivities. Industrial symbiosis is but one recent argument that shows the limits of suchpolicies. Perhaps even more important is the concept now referred to as “Jacobs exter-nalities.” We now turn to a discussion of this idea. Jacobs Externalities One of the least controversial aspects of technological change is that innovations are created through new combinations of previously unrelated things. As Babbage (1832,chap. 27, non-paginated) put it, the “power of inventing mechanical contrivances, and ofcombining machinery, does not appear, if we may judge from the
mechanical contrivances, and ofcombining machinery, does not appear, if we may judge from the frequency of itsoccurrences, to be a difﬁcult or a rare gift.” For example, almost four centuries ago in theNetherlands, windmill technologies used for water pumping were adapted for woodsawing, while in the nineteenth century American telegraph companies borrowed the“template” developed by railroad companies to handle the ﬂows of multiple messages toand from multiple locations (Bunker & Ciccantell, 2005). The ﬁrst applications of dieselengines were in stationary uses (pumps and oil drills) and in heavy transport (boats andlocomotives) (Smil, 2005), while “everything we eat, wear, and use” is now made withsome help from electric motors (p. 79). Building on this insight, urban theorist Jane Jacobs (1969) argued that economically diversiﬁed cities provide the best setting for “adding new work to old.” Although hertheoretical framework is broader and encompasses factors such as access to capital,zoning regulations, and the importance of agglomeration economies for entrepreneurialstart-ups, so-called “Jacobs externalities” are now broadly understood to mean “inter-industrial knowledge spillovers” occurring in economically diverse cities as a result of theinteraction of individuals possessing different backgrounds (Algaze, 2005; Desrochers &Hospers, 2007). By contrast, a local economy that is not well diversiﬁed is obviouslymuch less likely to promote the development of new combinations. Of course, individualsmay move from one geographical area to another, or have sustained collaborations withother individuals in more remote locations, but this does not undermine the fact that amore diversiﬁed local economy increases the probability and ease of creating new com-binations, although it is not an absolute prerequisite in this respect. 820 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
In the last decade and a half, the authors of several econometric papers have examined the concept by distinguishing between traditional “static” externalities (such as alreadyexisting agglomeration economies) and more dynamic ones, such as knowledge ﬂowsbetween ﬁrms and industries. They have attempted to test the relative importance ofJacobs externalities against the traditional view that regional specialization should bemore beneﬁcial in terms of innovative, and therefore commercially successful, behavior(Feldman, 2000; Glaeser, Kallal, Scheinkman, & Shleifer, 1992; van der Panne & vanBeers, 2006). Reviewing these contributions, Duranton and Puga (2000, p. 53) concludethat the “link between innovation and diversity seems fairly robust” and that “highlyinnovative clusters cannot be bred in previously specialized environments.” This literature, however, can be criticized on several counts. Perhaps most signiﬁcant is that these studies rely on location quotients and similar relative measures of sectoralconcentrations or diversity in large metropolitan areas that are then correlated (or not) with“outputs” such as innovations or new product advertised in the technical literature; patentdata; answers to questionnaires enquiring about the adoption/introduction of new tech-nologies; or employment, income, and productivity growth. Researchers then invokelocalized knowledge spillovers when commenting upon their results, but these studies donot document them or even prove their existence (Breschi & Lissoni, 2001a, 2001b;Hansen, 2002; Quigley, 1998). Commenting on these and more qualitative studies on“learning regions” that emphasize the creative capacity of regions, networks, and infor-mational technologies, Hansen (2002, p. 261) argues that more meaningful analyses of thetopic “would require disaggregated empirical studies of how knowledge in fact passesamong persons.” While the actual processes through which these new combinations occur have rarely been discussed in any
the actual processes through which these new combinations occur have rarely been discussed in any depth, 3a case can be made that any innovative individual can only combine different resources through two basic processes. The ﬁrst is to incorporate a newtype of material/process/product (M/P/P) to a previously unrelated M/P/P, while thesecond is to ﬁnd a new use for an existing M/P/P (Desrochers, 2000, 2001d). Examples ofthe former include Thomas Edison’s idea of a screw base for his light bulbs that came tohim in 1880 as he unscrewed the cover of a kerosene can (Smil, 2005), and the Americancontainer shipping pioneer Charles McLean whose inspiration can be traced back to hisdays as a trucker watching bales of cotton being hauled by sweating laborers, with thetrailer eventually becoming the container (Jung, 2005). In a corporate context, some ofthe early success of the Ford Motor Company can be traced back to the successfulintegration of sheet steel punch and presswork technologies used in the bicycle industryand to the development of the assembly line through the adaptation of ideas and tech-niques previously used in the “disassembly lines” of meatpackers and in ﬂour milling(Hounshell, 1991/1984). Numerous examples of new uses found for existing know-how can be observed in the so-called “bicycle craze” that hit the United States in the late nineteenth century. In NewEngland, numerous arms makers, sewing machine companies, and other small-itemmanufacturing concerns competed to enter this line of business. In the Midwest, bicyclebuilders “emerged primarily from the ranks of carriage- and wagon makers, wooden toyand novelty specialists, agricultural implement makers, or as totally new enterprises”(Hounshell, 1991/1984, p. 208). Another well-documented case is the rapid diversiﬁcationof German synthetic dyes manufacturers in the early twentieth century which, in time, turn 3. One exception is Goldfarb’s (2005) short case studies on the diffusion of electric motors --- led to innovations in a new setting by building on past expertise. As the same engineer put it: “You always bring various experiences and know-how from one ﬁeld to anotherwhether in mining, plastic molding, car manufacturing. You need pumps, compressors,pipes, whatever ....Y o u c a n often apply something that you learned in one place to another.” Among other examples, a machinist working in a cement manufacturing plantsuggested a new way to clean tankers based on his previous experience in a newspaperprinting plant. Discovering a New Use Another frequent mechanism by which new knowledge entrepreneurial opportunities are created is the discovery of a new use for an existing product or set of skills (Minniti,2004; Shane, 2000). One individual adapted a signaling device he had created for a creditunion for use in the restaurant business. Another innovator modiﬁed a measuring device,incorporating a number of electronic components originally developed to assess carcrashes, in order to make it suitable for archeological excavations. In both cases, indi-viduals noticed a problem (the ﬁrst in person, the second while watching television) thatwas not directly affecting them, but for the solution of which they immediately saw apotential new use for one of their creations. Another innovator found that there was notmuch demand for a new type of ski rack he had designed for use in private homes, but thatpiling them on top of each other helped sporting goods store managers better display theirmerchandise. In this case, the suggestion came from a sporting equipment retailer whohad no real interest for the innovation’s original use, but who immediately saw how itmight prove useful to him. Adapting Technologies Developed for Other Purposes Many entrepreneurs adapted technologies they had observed in another setting. For example, one individual who was working on Christmas light decorations decided tocreate a Christmas tree made entirely of optical ﬁbers after visiting an optical
turn 3. One exception is Goldfarb’s (2005) short case studies on the diffusion of electric motors between 1880 and 1930 to urban transit, printing, and paper making. 821 September, 2008
their basic raw material (coal tar derived from coal gasiﬁcation) into a suitable input for the manufacture of products ranging from explosives, medicines, and perfumes to ﬂavor-ing materials, sweeteners, disinfectants, antitoxins, and tracing and photographic agents(Beer, 1959/1981). Perhaps the main reason for the paucity of detailed accounts of interindustrial knowl- edge spillovers in diversiﬁed cities is the difﬁculty of tracking a large number of indi-viduals who move frequently between different lines of work and/or regularly borrowideas from ﬁelds other than their own. Most individual innovators, however, tend to ﬁt thisproﬁle (Brown, 1988). In a preliminary attempt to better understand the processesinvolved in the creation of new combinations in a diversiﬁed urban setting, semistructuredface-to-face interviews were conducted with 45 southern Quebec (Canada) entrepreneurs,43 of which were French-Canadians (Desrochers, 2000). What follows is a synthesis ofthe broader patterns observed in this group of individuals, along with a few illustrativeexamples. 4 Despite their very different characteristics and backgrounds, striking regularities were observed in all innovators’ creative processes, with individuals often going back and forthbetween the following steps: (1) problem identiﬁcation; (2) examination of a wide rangeof potential solutions; (3) trial and error; (4) creation of a new combination; (5) newproblem identiﬁcation, as there can be never be a perfect artifact. Individuals had only twoways of creating new combinations of existing products, processes, and materials: (1) ﬁnda new use for something with which they were familiar; (2) incorporate something withwhich they were previously unfamiliar into something with which they were alreadyfamiliar. All individuals admitted that they frequently borrowed and adapted existing things in new ways, whether they were working on a particular invention or in production activities.The main processes in this respect
working on a particular invention or in production activities.The main processes in this respect follow one of three common patterns: (1) interindustryjob mobility, (2) discovery of a new use, and (3) adaptation of technologies developed forother purposes. These processes will now be illustrated with a few examples of newcombinations created between the early 1970s and the late 1990s. Interindustry Job Mobility A common process through which new technology combinations were created is job mobility between different industries. To summarize, technically creative individualslacking the credentials or interest to climb a corporate ladder often changed jobs andindustrial sectors. For example, a machinist moved between the steel, chemical, andaerospace industries before spending some time in porcelain making and real estate. Amechanical engineer got his start in an ore processing plant and later worked for a carplant, a truck plant, and a plastic manufacturer. He summarized the comments of severalinterviewees by pointing out the following: “I was never able to stay more than two orthree years at the same place. After two or three years, I knew everything. I had doneeverything. I needed new challenges. I was soon looking elsewhere.” Job mobility in turn 4. See Desrochers’s (2000) doctoral dissertation for further justiﬁcation of the choice of individual inventors, along with more detailed descriptions of the sample characteristics, methodology, complete results, andlimitations of the study. In short, 45 Southern Quebec (Saint-Lawrence Valley) inventors were interviewedbetween 1997 and 1999 through a now defunct (and mostly) French-Canadian inventors association. Forty-three of the 45 interviewees were French-Canadians, a majority of which was, for cultural and linguisticreasons, reluctant to engage in long-distance business relationships with other individuals and businesses basedelsewhere in North America. Original quotes used in this essay were translated from the
basedelsewhere in North America. Original quotes used in this essay were translated from the (Quebec) French. 822 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
decided tocreate a Christmas tree made entirely of optical ﬁbers after visiting an optical ﬁber display.Another entrepreneur adapted an agricultural equipment device mechanism to create anew type of four-wheeled bicycle. A baby blanket/bag producer modeled her smallworkshop on the division of labor observed in the kitchen of a large restaurant owned byone of her friends. As one individual put it: “You always adapt things that you see in othersettings. Whether it is only a part of it or the whole thing, this happens every day ....Y o u see something and you go: “Great idea !...A n d then you incorporate it. It’s very com- m o n .... There is no point in reinventing the four-hole button. You must make the most out of what already exists.” Another entrepreneur concurs: “Sometimes I have ideas, butI don’t know how to realize them .... When I see something, I tell myself that this is what I would nee d...Ig oc o p y elsewher e...I don’t turn down what already exists, I won’t reinvent the wheel. It’s faster that way.” Of course, much development work often needsto be done once an idea for a new combination has been hit upon. The existence of industrial symbiosis and Jacobs externalities tends to show that the best context for entrepreneurship is a diverse environment where old ways of doing thingsare likely to nourish new discoveries. This fact argues in favor of policies that emphasizethe quality of the environment for entrepreneurship rather than planned regional special-ization. In order to explore this tentative conclusion further, we now turn to a moredetailed discussion of the role of the local environment and the importance of proximity. 823 September, 2008
On the Importance of Geographical Proximity The role played by local diversity in facilitating new combinations is multidimen- sional. First, local diversity matters in terms of the kind of work experience individualswho remain for a signiﬁcant period of time in a particular location are likely to acquire andin terms of the sectors in which they are likely to transfer or adapt it. 5For example, some interviewees had worked in the car assembly and supply parts industries and gainedspecialized knowledge in that environment before applying some of it to other lines ofwork. This sector, however, is to a large extent being phased out of the Quebec economy.It is therefore less likely to provide learning opportunities in years to come. On the otherhand, new sectors are emerging and are currently providing valuable know-how to anumber of creative individuals and would-be entrepreneurs. Another important dimension of local diversity is the network of experts and poten- tially knowledgeable people possessing the varied expertise that an individual builds overtime, both within particular ﬁrms and with various customers and suppliers, whicheventually act as either partners, occasional collaborators, mentors, or advisers. A recur-ring comment to that effect goes somewhat like this: I was looking for something thatwould do that. I talked about it to individual X. He thought about it for a while and saidthat I should look up that particular thing that can be found at this or that supplier ormanufacturer. Of course, sometimes plain luck—such as talking to a person sitting next toyou at a restaurant—also plays a role. The importance of geographical proximity for communicating speciﬁc features and for conducting numerous experiments to “get a product right” cannot be overemphasized.Even what looked like very simple plastic devices frequently required more than 30 sitevisits on the part of an innovator to a mold-making shop. An extreme case is the inventorof a new board game who --- part of an innovator to a mold-making shop. An extreme case is the inventorof a new board game who claims that he had to meet his graphic designer more than 1,000times before a satisfactory result could be obtained. As could be expected, most entre-preneurs agreed that face-to-face communication between individuals possessing differentexpertise is even more crucial than for experts in the same ﬁeld (although the latter istypically considered very important) because they do not share a similar background andtechnical language. Face-to-face interaction was also deemed crucial to built trust rela-tionships and to select suppliers. The importance of proximity results from the nature of knowledge, or perhaps more accurately, know-how. While new communications means have dramatically improved theﬂow of information and facilitated business interactions, widely publicized reports on the“death of distance” are greatly exaggerated (Morgan, 2004). In short, as Hayek (1945)argued, much of the knowledge that makes markets work is difﬁcult to articulate andtherefore not easily transmissible. Similarly, in urban environments, the crucial knowl-edge is not explicit, formalized, and easy to communicate, but rather nonstandardized andembodied in human capital (Desrochers, 2001a; Desrochers & Sautet, 2004). This largelyintangible character of urban environments was described by Marshall (1890/1920, bookIV , chap. X, nonpaginated) as being “in the air” and producing the effect that “if one manstarts a new idea, it is taken up by others and combined with suggestions of their own; and 5. While it seems obvious that some minority linguistic regions dominated by one large manufacturing center (such as Quebec and many small European countries) are less conducive to geographical mobility than largeentities such as the United States, a case could probably be made that strong local ties, such as family andfriends, favor interindustrial job mobility, if only because individuals possessing
as family andfriends, favor interindustrial job mobility, if only because individuals possessing particular expertise might beless willing to move to other areas where there might be a demand for their particular skills after they have lostor quit their job. 824 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
thus it becomes the source of further new ideas.” Evidence seems to show that policy makers are not well placed to identify and enhance the ﬂows of tacit knowledge that makethe richness of prosperous urban centers for they lack the know-how, know-who, andexperience acquired over time and in different workplaces by entrepreneurs, managers,and technicians. Regional development policies often ignore the importance of knowledgeand its transmission. Instead, policies should focus on the quality of the institutionalcontext in order to enhance the chances for entrepreneurs to discover new combinationsand make the most of the knowledge lying around. We now turn to the importance of entrepreneurial activity in the emergence of diversiﬁed urban centers. The Entrepreneurial Process and Agglomeration Economies Many individuals involved in entrepreneurial ventures to create and market their innovations deemed traditional agglomeration economies extremely valuable. To illustratethat an innovative idea is but one step in the creation of a marketable product, consider asmall plastic ﬂask whose only originality lay in its design. Its creator credited his abilityto put his product on the market in a timely manner to the presence of the following localindividuals and ﬁrms who all relied on a diversiﬁed customer base to stay in business: anindustrial designer, a plastic molder, a plastic product specialist, a rope supplier, a capsupplier, a label maker, a shop to put everything together, a salesman, and a distributor.Countless examples such as these illustrate the truth of Thomas Edison’s alleged obser-vation that invention is 1% inspiration and 99% perspiration. Such entrepreneurial activi-ties, along with the important role played by urbanization economies in this context,however, are typically missing from recent discussions of “Jacobs externalities.” Building on the entrepreneurs study described earlier, and an eclectic literature review in several academic ﬁelds ranging from
study described earlier, and an eclectic literature review in several academic ﬁelds ranging from cognitive psychology to the history of technology,a case can be made that new technology combinations in the commercial realm typicallyoccur under the following, often nonmutually exclusive, circumstances: (1) in multidis-ciplinary teams working within a ﬁrm; (2) when employees add to, or switch, their productline; (3) when individuals observe a product/process in another setting and incorporate itinto their main activity; (4) when individuals move from one type of production toanother; and (5) when individuals possessing different skills and working for differentﬁrms collaborate with each other (Desrochers, 2001d). Most innovators who had lived in both a diversiﬁed city and an economically spe- cialized (i.e., monoindustrial or resource-based) region agreed that the former provided anenvironment that not only gave them the opportunity to see more problems, but also abetter opportunity to actually do something about them by providing easier access toa wider pool of expert knowledge and other resources. These observations supportMinguzzi and Passaro’s (2000, p. 181) suggestions that the cultural evolution processesobserved in small ﬁrms are “strongly inﬂuenced by the type of relationships that theyestablish with the economic environment” 6and that the resistance to change observed in some territorial and industrial contexts is often determined “by a cultural entrepreneurialhomogeneity.” This latter point was certainly obvious to Keir (1919, p. 47): 6. The economic environment as deﬁned by these authors is made up of the following actors: clients/ suppliers, competitors, central and local administration, and consultants. The “network of relations betweenthe ﬁrm and the market” is represented by factors such as changing combinations of the ﬁrm size, marketconditions, industry characteristics, and export processes. 825 September, 2008
From the point of view of employees, [geographically specialized] localization is bad because it also tends toward narrowing the minds of the townspeople. A young manbrought up in Fall River [Massachusetts], say, has but little choice of occupation; hemust become a weaver or a loom-ﬁxer or some other artisan connected with cottonmanufacture, because by upbringing, education and example he is forced into thatpath, and furthermore he goes to work at an early age. It may happen that many asquare peg is rammed into a round hole in this way, or a life constricted which mightunder better conditions have expanded. There is something deadening to the humanmind in uniformity; progress comes through variation, therefore in a town of oneindustry a young man loses the stimulus for self-advancement. Interestingly, Michael Porter (2000a, p. 24) seems to have caught on to this rationale when he argues that when individuals in a cluster share “a uniform approach to competing,a sort of groupthink often reinforces old behaviors, suppresses new ideas, and createsrigidities that prevent adoption of improvements.” “Clusters,” it turns out, might also “notsupport truly radical innovation, which tends to invalidate the existing pools of talent,information, suppliers, and infrastructure.” While in these circumstances a cluster partici-pant might not necessarily be worse off than an isolated ﬁrm because both can outsource,“the ﬁrm in an established cluster might suffer from greater barriers to perceiving the needto change and from inertia against severing past relationships that no longer contribute tocompetitive advantage.” As we have argued throughout the paper, much evidence suggests that the environ- ment in which entrepreneurs operate exerts much inﬂuence on their capacity to innovate.As William Baumol (1990) argued, the institutional environment has an impact on howsocially beneﬁcial entrepreneurial activity can be. We contend that policy strategies thatdeliberately reinforce regional
activity can be. We contend that policy strategies thatdeliberately reinforce regional specialization tend to impoverish the environment forentrepreneurs because they limit the probabilities of seeing and acting on new opportu-nities, whether through the development of new interindustrial linkages or new combina-tions. Entrepreneurial activity is at the source of diversiﬁed urban centers, which in turnbecome places where entrepreneurs often ﬁnd the most conducive substrate for theiractivities. While much historical evidence demonstrates that economic specializationemerges spontaneously, however, local economies that fail to diversify over time typicallydevelop much slower (if at all beyond a certain point) than local economies whereentrepreneurs constantly generate new activities, a point made several decades ago byChinitz (1961) in his comparative analysis of New York City and Pittsburgh. If, as theoryand evidence suggest, the context in which entrepreneurship develops matters most to thedevelopment of healthy economic regions, then the case for planned regional specializa-tion runs into problems which severely limit its potential success (Kirzner, 1979). Conclusion In the wake of the success of Michael Porter’s cluster strategy and a long-held belief that the geographical specialization of economic activities is a desirable outcome of tradeand the division of labor, regional development policy in the last two decades has heavilyfavored regional specialization at the expense of local economic diversity. While there isno doubt that the division of labor among individuals is beneﬁcial for society at large(although it should perhaps be thought of more often in terms of skills rather than ﬁnalproducts), the advantages of promoting regional specialization through public policyare less obvious. Indeed, much evidence suggests that specialization leaves regional 826 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE --- the implementation ofpolicies that might foster the emergence of geographical agglomerations of diverse activ-ities, we claim that promoting policies that encourage regional specialization may lead tocounterproductive results. Indeed, it is difﬁcult, if not impossible, to engineer symbiotic 827 September, 2008
economies more likely to experience severe economic downturns and is less conducive to the development of symbiotic linkages between diverse ﬁrms (including recyclinglinkages). Furthermore, if innovation is understood as the socially beneﬁcial combination of previously unrelated things by entrepreneurs, it is likely that a more diversiﬁed environ-ment will increase the probability of combining existing skills and resources in differentconﬁgurations by offering a greater number and variety of problems to be solved, as wellas a much wider pool of expert knowledge and other useful resources to develop newsolutions. This result, in part, rests on the nature of knowledge and its transmission. Whatmatters to entrepreneurial discovery is not only explicit and easily transmissible knowl-edge, but also the knowledge that is tacit and harder to transmit. Proximity and diversityoffer the context for entrepreneurs to build on explicit and tacit knowledge so as to createnew combinations and thereby innovate. Much evidence conﬁrms the crucial importanceof agglomeration economies for innovative business start-ups. The speciﬁc impact of local diversity on entrepreneurial activities, however, is not as easily assessed as that of a regionally specialized industry. Most of the innovations andentrepreneurial acts documented in our study were built on the foundations of SouthernQuebec’s economic diversity, but drew on the kind of materials, devices, and expertisethat could be found in most important urban agglomerations (i.e., expertise in metals,plastics, electronic components, design, marketing, distribution, etc.). Be that as it may, itseems highly plausible that, as Aitken (1985, pp. 15–16) argued, “the points of conﬂuenceof information ﬂows deﬁne the social locations where there is a high probability of newcombinations being made.” All this is not to say, of course, that specialized districts or clusters are bad things. After all, their historical importance and prevalence over
connections or knowledge spillovers between industries in a diverse environment. However, we make the case that purposefully promoting regional specialization at theexpense of spontaneously emerging diversity is most certainly wrongheaded. REFERENCES Aitken, H.J. (1985). The continuous wave: Technology and American radio 1900–1932 . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Algaze, G. (2005). The Sumerian takeoff. Structure and Dynamics: eJournal of Anthropological and Related Sciences 1 (1), article 2. Available at http://repositories.cdlib/imbs/socdyn/sdeas/vol1/iss1/art2, accessed 12 March 2008. Ayres, R.U. & Ayres, L.W. (2002). A handbook of industrial ecology . Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar. Babbage, C. (1832). On the economy of machinery and manufactures . Available at http:// socserv2.socsci.mcmaster.ca/~econ/ugcm/3ll3/babbage/index.html, accessed 12 March 2008. Bathelt, H. (2005). Geographies of production: Growth regimes in spatial perspective (II)—knowledge creation and growth in clusters. Progress in Human Geography ,29(2), 204–216. Bathelt, H., Malmberg, A., & Maskell, P. (2004). Clusters and knowledge: Local buzz, global pipelines and the process of knowledge creation. Progress in Human Geography ,28(1), 31–56. Baumol, W. (1990). Entrepreneurship: Productive, unproductive, and destructive. The Journal of Political Economy ,98(5), 893–921. Beer, J.J. (1981). The emergence of the German dye industry . New York: Arno Press (Original work published 1959). Breschi, S. & Lissoni, F. (2001a). Localised knowledge spillovers vs innovative milieux: Knowledge “tacit- ness” reconsidered. Papers in Regional Science ,80(3), 255–273. Breschi, S. & Lissoni, F. (2001b). Knowledge spillovers and local innovation systems: A critical survey. Industrial and Corporate Change ,10(4), 975–1005. Britton, J.H. (2004). High technology localization and extra-regional networks. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development ,16(5), 369–390. Brown, K.A. (1988). Inventors at work.
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development ,16(5), 369–390. Brown, K.A. (1988). Inventors at work. Interviews with 16 notable American inventors . Redmond, WA: Tempus Book of Microsoft Press. Bunker, S.G. & Ciccantell, P.S. (2005). Globalization and the race for resources . Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. Chapman, K. (2005). From “growth centre” to “cluster”: Restructuring, regional development, and the teesside chemical industry. Environment and Planning A ,37(4), 597–615. Chapman, K. & Walker, D. (1987). Industrial location . Oxford: Basil Blackwell. Chertow, M. (2000). Industrial symbiosis: Literature and taxonomy. Annual Review of Energy and the Environment ,25, 313–337. Chinitz, B. (1961). Contrasts in agglomeration: New York and Pittsburgh. American Economic Review ,51(2), 279–289. 828 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Chiu, A.S. (2002). Ecology, systems, and networking. Walking the talk in Asia. Journal of Industrial Ecology , 5(2), 6–8. Cortright, J. (2006). Making sense of clusters: Regional competitiveness and economic development . Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. Available at: http://www.brookings.edu/metro/mei/ 20060727_clusters.htm, accessed 12 March 2008. Desrochers, P. (2000). De l’inﬂuence d’une ville diversiﬁée sur la combinaison de techniques. Typologie et analyse de processus . PhD dissertation, Department of Geography, Université de Montréal. Desrochers, P. (2001a). Geographical proximity and the transmission of tacit knowledge. Review of Austrian Economics ,14(1), 63–83. Desrochers, P. (2001b). Cities and industrial symbiosis: Some historical perspective and policy implications. Journal of Industrial Ecology ,5(4), 29–44. Desrochers, P. (2001c). Eco-industrial parks: The case for private planning. The Independent Review: A Journal of Political Economy ,5(3), 345–371. Desrochers, P. (2001d). Local diversity, human creativity and technological innovation. Growth and Change , 32(3), 369–394. Desrochers, P. (2002a). Regional development and inter-industry recycling linkages: Some historical perspec- tive. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development ,14(1), 49–65. Desrochers, P. (2002b). Industrial ecology and the rediscovery of inter-ﬁrm recycling linkages: Historical evidence and policy implications. Industrial and Corporate Change ,11(5), 1031–1057. Desrochers, P. (2007). How did the invisible hand handle industrial waste? By-product development before the modern environmental era. Enterprise and Society ,8(2), 348–374. Desrochers, P. & Sautet, F. (2004). Cluster-based economic strategy, facilitation policy and the market process. Review of Austrian Economics ,17(2/3), 233–245. Desrochers, P. & Hospers, G.-J. (2007). Cities and the economic development of nations: An essay on Jane Jacobs’ contribution to economic theory. Canadian Journal of Regional Science --- An essay on Jane Jacobs’ contribution to economic theory. Canadian Journal of Regional Science ,30(1), 115– 130. Deutz, P. & Gibbs, D. (2004). Eco-industrial development and economic development: Industrial ecology or place promotion? Business Strategy and the Environment ,13(5), 346–362. Devas, C.S. (1901). Political economy (2nd ed., rewritten and enlarged). London: Longmans, Green, and Co. Dicken, P. & Lloyd, P. (1990). Location in space. Theoretical perspectives in economic geography (3rd ed.). New York: Harper Collins Publishers Inc. Duranton, G. & Puga, D. (2000). Diversity and specialisation in cities: Why, where and when does it matter? Urban Studies ,37(3), 533–555. Feldman, M. (2000). Location and innovation: The new economic geography of innovation, spillovers and agglomeration. In G.L. Clark, M.P. Feldman, & M.S. Gertler (Eds.), Oxford handbook of economic geography (pp. 373–394). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Garner, A. & Keoleian, G.A. (1995). Industrial ecology: An introduction . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, National Pollution Prevention Center for Higher Education. Glaeser, E., Kallal, H., Scheinkman, J., & Shleifer, A. (1992). Growth in cities. Journal of Political Economy , 100(6), 1126–1152. 829 September, 2008
Goldfarb, B. (2005). Diffusion of general-purpose technologies: Understanding patterns in the electriﬁcation of US manufacturing 1880–1930. Industrial and Corporate Change ,14(5), 745–773. Hansen, N. (1996). Regional development policies: Past problems and future possibilities. Canadian Journal of Regional Science ,19(1), 107–118. Available at http://www.lib.unb.ca/Texts/CJRS/bin/get.cgi? directory=Spring96/&ﬁlename=HANSEN.htm, accessed 12 March 2008. Hansen, N. (2002). Dynamic externalities and spatial innovation diffusion: Implications for peripheral regions. International Journal of Technology, Policy and Management ,2(3), 260–271. Hayek, F.A. (1945). The use of knowledge in society. American Economic Review ,35(4), 519–30. (Reprinted inIndividualism and Economic Order , 1948. Chicago: University of Chicago Press) Hoover, E.M. & Giarratani, F. (1984). An introduction to regional economics (3rd ed.). New York: Alfred A. Knopf. Hounshell, D. (1991/1984). From the American system to mass production, 1800–1932 . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Jacobs, J. (1969). The economy of cities . New York: Random House. Jacobsen, N.B. (2006). Industrial symbiosis in Kalundborg, Denmark. A quantitative assessment of economic and environmental aspects. Journal of Industrial Ecology ,10(1/2), 239–255. Jacobsen, N.B. & Anderberg, S. (2004). Understanding the evolution of industrial symbiotic networks. In J. van den Bergh & M.A. Janssen (Eds.), Economics of industrial ecology. Materials, structural change, and spatial scales (pp. 313–335). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. Jung, A. (2005). The box that makes the world go round. Special Spiegel International Edition . Available at http://www.spiegel.de/international/spiegel/0,1518,386799,00.html, accessed 21 July 2008. Keir, M. (1919). The localization of industry. How it starts; why it grows and persists. The Scientiﬁc Monthly , 8(1), 32–48. Kershaw, J.B.C. (1928). The recovery and use of industrial and other waste . London:
, 8(1), 32–48. Kershaw, J.B.C. (1928). The recovery and use of industrial and other waste . London: Ernest Benn Limited. Khan, J.H. & Ghani, J.A. (2004). Clusters and entrepreneurship: Implications for innovation in a developing economy. Journal of Development Entrepreneurship ,9(3), 221–238. Kirzner, I.M. (1979, February). The perils of regulation: A market-process approach. Occasional paper of the Law and Economics Center, University of Miami School of Law. (Reprinted in Discovery and the capitalist process . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985) Koller, T. (1918). The utilization of waste products: A treatise on the rational utilization, recovery, and treatment of waste products of all kinds (3rd revised ed., translated from the 2nd revised German ed.). New York: D. Van Nostrand Company. Lipsett, C. (1963/1951). Industrial wastes and salvage. Conservation and utilization . New York: The Atlas Publishing Co., Inc. Lowe, E.A. (1995, May 4–5). The Eco-Industrial Park: A business environment for a sustainable future. Paper presented at the conference Designing, Financing, and Building the Industrial Park of the Future, sponsoredby the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Institute, and the University of California at San Diego, San Diego. Malizia, E.E. & Feser, E.J. (1999). Understanding local economic development . New Brunswick, NJ: Center for Urban Policy Research, Rutgers University. 830 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Marshall, A. (1920). Principles of economics (8th ed.). London: MacMillan. Available at http:// www.econlib.org/library/Marshall/marP.html, accessed 12 March 2008. (Original work published 1890) Marx, K. (1894). CAPITAL, volume III: The process of capitalist production as a whole . Available at http://www.econlib.org/library/YPDBooks/Marx/mrxCpC5.html#Part%20I,%20Chapter%205, accessed 10 August, 2006. Minguzzi, A. & Passaro, R. (2000). The network of relationships between the economic environment and the entrepreneurial culture in small ﬁrms. Journal of Business Venturing ,16(1), 181–207. Minniti, M. (2004). Organization alertness and asymmetric information in a spin-glass model. Journal of Business Venturing ,19(5), 637–658. Morgan, K. (2004). The exaggerated death of geography: Learning, proximity and territorial innovation systems. Journal of Economic Geography ,4(1), 3–21. Polese, M. (2005). Cities and national economic growth: A reappraisal. Urban Studies ,42(8), 1429–1451. Porter, M. (1990). The competitive advantage of nations . London: Macmillan. Porter, M. (1998). Location, clusters and the “new” microeconomics of competition. Business Economics , 33(1), 7–17. Porter, M. (2000a). Location, competition, and economic development: Local clusters in a global economy. Economic Development Quarterly ,14(1), 15–34. Porter, M. (2000b). Location, clusters and company strategy. In G.L. Clark, M.S. Gertler, & M.P. Feldman (Eds.). The Oxford handbook of economic geography (pp. 253–274). New York: Oxford University Press. Quigley, J.M. (1998). Urban diversity and economic growth. Journal of Economic Perspectives ,12(2), 127–138. Renner, G.T. (1947). Geography of industrial localization. Economic Geography ,23(3), 167–189. Ricardo, D. (1821). The principles of political economy and taxation (3rd ed). London: John Murray. Available at: http://www.econlib.org/library/Ricardo/ricP.html, accessed 12 March 2008. (Original work pub-lished 1817) Rocha, H.O. (2004). --- Shane, S. (2000). Prior knowledge, and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities. Organization Science , 11(4), 448–469. Siegel, P.B., Johnson, T.G., & Alwang, J. (1995). Regional economic diversity and diversiﬁcation: Seeking a framework for analysis. Growth and Change ,26(2), 261–284. Simmonds, P.L. (1876/1873). Waste products and undeveloped substances: A synopsis of progress made in their economic utilisation during the last quarter of a century at home and abroad (3rd ed.). London: Hardwicke and Bogue. Smil, V . (2005). Creating the twentieth century . New York: Oxford University Press. Talbot, F.A. (1920). Millions from waste . Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Company. Unger, R.M. (2007). Free trade reimagined: The world division of labor and the method of economics . Princeton: Princeton University Press. van der Panne, G. & van Beers, C. (2006). On the Marshall-Jacobs controversy: It takes two to tango. Industrial and Corporate Change ,15(5), 877–890. Wheeler, J.O., Muller, P.O., Thrall, G.I., & Fink, T.J. (1998). Economic geography . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Wolf, A., Eklund, M., & Söderström, M. (2007). Developing integration in a local industrial system—an explorative approach. Business Strategy and the Environment ,16(6), 442–455. Pierre Desrochers is at Department of Geography, University of Toronto Mississauga, 3359 Mississauga Road North, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada. Frederic Sautet is at The Mercatus Center at George Mason University, North Fairfax Drive, Arlington, V A, USA. The authors acknowledge funding for the research that led to this paper was provided by the Fonds pour la formation de chercheurs et l’aide à la recherche (Government of Québec), the Social Sciences and HumanitiesResearch Council (Government of Canada), and the Koch Foundation. 832 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
accessed 12 March 2008. (Original work pub-lished 1817) Rocha, H.O. (2004). Entrepreneurship and development: The role of clusters. Small Business Economics , 23(5), 363–400. Rocha, H.O. & Sternberg, R. (2005). Entrepreneurship: The role of clusters. Theoretical perspectives and empirical evidence from Germany. Small Business Economics ,24(3), 267–292. Rogers, J.E.T. (1884). Six centuries of work and wages: The history of English labour . (Reprint 2001 by Batoche Books. Available at http://socserv2.socsci.mcmaster.ca/~econ/ugcm/3ll3/rogers/sixcenturies.pdf, Accessed 12 March 2008) Rosenfeld, S. (2001, March 29–30). Backing into clusters: Retroﬁtting public policies. Paper presented at the Integration Pressures: Lessons from Around the World, John F. Kennedy School Symposium, HarvardUniversity. Available at: http://www.rtsinc.org/publications/Harvard4%20doc%20copy.pdf, accessed 12 March 2008. Rosenthal, S.S. & Strange, W. (2004). Evidence on the nature and sources of agglomeration economies. In V . Henderson & J. Thisse (Eds.). Handbook of urban and regional economics, volume 4 (pp. 2119–2172). New York: Elsevier. Ross, E.A. (1896). The location of industries. Quarterly Journal of Economics ,10(2), 247–268. 831 September, 2008
El texto "Entrepreneurial Policy: The Case of Regional Specialization vs. Spontaneous Industrial Diversity" de Pierre Desrochers y Frederic Sautet examina el debate sobre si las políticas de desarrollo económico regional deberían centrarse en la especialización industrial o en la diversidad industrial. A continuación, se presenta un resumen extremadamente detallado de los puntos clave abordados en el texto:

### 1. **Importancia de la Política de Desarrollo Regional**
   - La política de desarrollo económico regional es fundamental para fomentar la prosperidad económica.
   - Se discute si la especialización o la diversidad de actividades económicas debe ser el objetivo de estas políticas.

### 2. **Contexto de Diversidad Local**
   - Los autores revisan argumentos a favor de la diversidad industrial, incorporando conceptos como la simbiosis industrial y las externalidades de Jacobs.
   - Se concluye que las políticas que permiten a los emprendedores aprovechar oportunidades en un contexto de diversidad industrial espontánea son más efectivas para el desarrollo regional.

### 3. **Evolución de las Estrategias de Desarrollo Regional**
   - Las estrategias que promueven la localización de empresas interdependientes se remontan a los años 60 y 70, con términos como "polo de crecimiento" y "complejo industrial".
   - Estas políticas buscaban crear economías de aglomeración y aumentar la productividad.

### 4. **Enfoque en Estrategias de Clúster**
   - En las últimas décadas, se ha enfatizado el impacto positivo de un contexto regional con empresas e instituciones cercanas en actividades emprendedoras e innovadoras.
   - La estrategia de clúster de Michael Porter ha sido influyente, aunque criticada por su vaguedad y uso para justificar el apoyo a industrias favorecidas políticamente.

### 5. **Cambio de Objetivos en el Desarrollo Local**
   - La estrategia de clúster ha desplazado el objetivo de diversificación, estableciendo la especialización regional como el objetivo preferido entre funcionarios de desarrollo local.

### 6. **Argumentos en Contra de la Especialización Regional**
   - Se argumenta que la especialización regional puede generar vulnerabilidades ante crisis cíclicas y obstaculizar la innovación.
   - Se presentan cuatro argumentos que cuestionan la efectividad de la especialización regional planificada:
     1. **Vínculos interindustriales y simbiosis industrial**: La colaboración entre sectores puede ser más beneficiosa que la especialización estricta.
     2. **Externalidades de Jacobs**: La diversidad industrial fomenta la innovación a través del intercambio de conocimientos.
     3. **Entorno local y proximidad**: Un contexto diverso puede ser más propicio para el emprendimiento.
     4. **El papel del emprendimiento**: Un ecosistema empresarial diverso es más efectivo que uno basado solo en la especialización.

### 7. **Evidencia Histórica y Teórica**
   - Se revisa la escasez de investigación sobre el impacto de las condiciones locales en el comportamiento emprendedor, señalando limitaciones conceptuales y metodológicas.
   - Se argumenta que la actividad emprendedora es fundamental para el desarrollo regional y que un entorno diverso es una condición previa necesaria para la aparición de especializaciones locales.

### 8. **Estructura del Ensayo**
   - El ensayo se divide en dos secciones: la primera revisa el debate sobre especialización vs. diversidad, y la segunda evalúa si la especialización regional planificada se opone a la perspectiva de libre comercio.

### 9. **Conclusiones sobre la Diversidad y la Innovación**
   - Se concluye que un entorno regional favorable para la actividad emprendedora es una ciudad diversificada con múltiples clústeres especializados.
   - La concentración geográfica de empresas relacionadas es un fenómeno antiguo en el desarrollo económico, y la innovación se define como una invención socialmente beneficiosa.

### 10. **Referencias Históricas y Ejemplos**
   - Se documentan ejemplos históricos de industrias localizadas en Inglaterra y se menciona la ley de la ventaja comparativa de David Ricardo.
   - Se discuten los intentos de fomentar "distritos industriales" y se critica la limitación de estas políticas a un análisis de insumo-producto.

### 11. **Implicaciones para la Política de Desarrollo**
   - Se sugiere que las políticas deben centrarse en mejorar el contexto para el emprendimiento, en lugar de enfocarse en la especialización regional planificada.
   - La proximidad y el contexto local son factores cruciales que merecen una discusión más profunda.

### 12. **Movilidad Laboral y Conocimiento Tácito**
   - Se destaca la importancia de la movilidad laboral interindustrial y el conocimiento tácito en la creación de nuevas combinaciones de productos y procesos.
   - Se argumenta que la diversidad local y las redes de conocimiento son esenciales para la innovación.

### 13. **Conclusión Final**
   - El texto critica las políticas de especialización regional y aboga por la diversidad económica como motor de innovación y desarrollo emprendedor.
   - Se enfatiza que un entorno diverso puede fomentar la innovación y la resiliencia de las economías locales, sugiriendo que las políticas deben facilitar la actividad emprendedora en lugar de imponer una especialización.

Este resumen detalla los puntos centrales del texto, proporcionando un contexto sobre la importancia de la diversidad industrial y la crítica a la especialización en las políticas de desarrollo económico regional.
