The ecosystem as helix: an exploratory theory-buildingstudy of regional co-opetitiveentrepreneurial ecosystems asQuadruple/Quintuple HelixInnovation Models Elias G. Carayannis1, Evangelos Grigoroudis2, David F. J. Campbell3,4, Dirk Meissner5and Dimitra Stamati2 1Department of Information Systems and Technology Management School of Business, The George Washington University, Duque `s Hall, Funger Hall, Suite 515C, 2201 G Street, NW, Washington, DC 20052, USA. caraye@gwu.edu 2School of Production Engineering and Management, University Campus, Technical University of Crete, Kounoupidiana, Chania 73100, Greece. vangelis@ergasya.tuc.gr; dimitrastamati22@gmail.com 3Faculty for Interdisciplinary Studies (iff), Institute of Science Communication and Higher Education Research (WIHO), Alpen-Adria-University Klagenfurt, Schottenfeldgasse 29, Vienna A-1070, Austria david.campbell@aau.at 4Unit for Quality Enhancement (UQE), University of Applied Arts Vienna, Oskar Kokoschka-Platz 2, Vienna A-1010, Austria. david.campbell@unik.ac.at 5National Research University Higher School of Economics, Myasnitskaya Street, 9/11, Moscow 101000, Russia. dmeissner@hse.ru Regions are increasingly being viewed as eco-systemic agglomerations of organizational and institutional entities or stakeholders with socio-technical, socio-economic, and socio-political conﬂicting as well as converging (co-opetitive) goals, priorities, expectations, andbehaviors that they pursue via entrepreneurial development, exploration, exploitation,and deployment actions, reactions and interactions. In this context, our paper aims toexplore and proﬁle the nature and dynamics of the Quadruple/Quintuple Helix InnovationSystem Model or Framework (government, university, industry, civil society, environ-ment) as an enabler and enactor of regional co-opetitive entrepreneurial ecosystems whichwe conceptualize as fractal, multi-level, multi-modal, multi-nodal, and multi-lateral con-ﬁgurations of dynamic tangible and intangible
multi-modal, multi-nodal, and multi-lateral con-ﬁgurations of dynamic tangible and intangible assets within the resource-based view andthe new theory of the growth of the ﬁrm. Co-opetitive fractal innovation and entrepre-neurship ecosystems are deﬁned and discussed, and examples of regional innovation 148 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
policies and programs are presented. Furthermore, the concept of multi-level innovation systems is analyzed, taking into account the existence of knowledge clusters and innova- tion networks, while alternative aggregations of multi-level innovation systems are proposed based on their spatial (geographical) and non-spatial (research-based) functionalproperties. 1. Introduction In this paper, we envision regions as eco-systemic agglomerations of organizational and institutional entities or stakeholders with socio-technical, socio- economic, and socio-political conﬂicting as well as converging (co-opetitive) goals, priorities, expecta-tions, and behaviors that they pursue via entrepreneur- ial development, exploration, exploitation, and deployment (DEED) actions, reactions, and interac-tions. In particular, we aim to study and represent the role, nature and dynamics of regional co-opetitive fractal ecosystems via the spectrum of an extendedversion of the Triple Helix, that of the Quadruple/ Quintuple Helix Innovation System Framework (see Figure 1), which is an agglomeration of ﬁrms, institu-tions, and other stakeholders intertwined via a helical, dynamic, complex, non-linear, self-similar (fractal), and self-organizing higher-order learning architectureof a knowledge production system [the ‘Mode 3’ Knowledge Production System which we discuss later (Carayannis and Campbell, 2009)]. This type of eco-systems we have named Co-opetitive Spatial andSectoral Fractal Innovation and Entrepreneurial Eco- systems (CS2FIE2). The main aim of the paper is to explore the extent and validity of equivalence of the ecosystem view of knowledge creation, diffusion and use with that of the Quadruple/Quintuple Helix Innovation SystemFramework and in this manner, provide a theoretical framework of regional co-opetitive innovation eco- systems within a Quadruple/Quintuple Helix contextas well as discuss current and future research agenda issues. In particular, the paper aims to explore and
as discuss current and future research agenda issues. In particular, the paper aims to explore and proﬁle the nature and dynamics of the Quadruple/Quintuple Helix Innovation System Framework as an enabler and enactor of regional co-opetitive entrepre- neurial ecosystems which we conceptualize as fractal,multi-level, multi-modal, multi-nodal, and multi- lateral conﬁgurations of dynamic tangible and intangi- ble assets within the resource-based view and the newtheory of the growth of the ﬁrm. In this context, co- opetitive and fractal innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystems are deﬁned and discussed, and examplesof regional innovation policies, programs, and proj- ects are presented. Furthermore, the concept of Figure 1. The Quadruple/Quintuple Helix Innovation System Framework – an CS2FIE2 perspective. Source: Adapted from Carayannis and Campbell (2010).The ecosystem as helix R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 149 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
multilevel innovation systems is analyzed, taking into account the existence of knowledge clusters and inno-vation networks. Moreover, alternative aggregationsof multi-level innovation systems are proposed basedon their spatial (geographical) and non-spatial(research-based) functional properties. The Triple Helix model of knowledge production, developed by Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff (2000),stresses three ‘helices’ that intertwine and, by this,generate an innovation system: academia/universities,industry, and state government. They are inclined tospeak of ‘university-industry-government relations’and networks, also placing a particular emphasis on‘tri-lateral networks and hybrid organizations’ wherethose helices overlap. The Triple Helix may beregarded as a ‘core model’ for innovation, resultingfrom interactions in knowledge production referringto universities (higher education), industries (econ-omy), and governments (multilevel). The Triple Helixis being contextualized by the broader innovationmodel of the Quadruple Helix (government, univer-sity, industry, civil society), which is blending in fea-tures of the public, for example, civil society and themedia-based and culture-based public (Carayannisand Campbell, 2011). Moreover, the components of the Triple Helix sys- tem are the institutional spheres of university, indus-try, and government where the actors encompassed bythese spheres are differentiated as follows (Carayan-nis and Rakhmatullin, 2014) R&D performers that can be found in university, which is a universal knowledge-producing and dis-seminating institution that encompasses both thearts and the sciences, and occasionally integratesand cross-fertilizes these apparently divergentmodalities in interdisciplinary units. Non-R&D actors, such as those intervening in the context of design, production marketing, sales,technology adoption, incremental change, combin-ing existing knowledge in new ways, interactionwith users, acquisition of patents and licenses etc.
existing knowledge in new ways, interactionwith users, acquisition of patents and licenses etc. Hybrid institutions synthesizing elements of aca- demia, industry and government institutionaldesign and/or support, which can be both R&Dand non-R&D performers. Regarding the relationships Carayannis and Rakh- matullin (2014) distinguish between two main typesof relationships as the social evolutionary mecha-nisms inducing change in Triple Helix systems: • Collaboration and conﬂict moderation including provision of R&D and consultancy services,competence-building, formation of new marketsor consolidation of existing ones, creating andchanging organizations and/or institutions, net- working, technology transfer or acquisition ofgoods and services through market or nonmarketinteractions, incubation activities, ﬁnancing,negotiation etc. • Substitution, where such relationships arise when, in addition to fulﬁlling their traditionalfunctions, each institutional sphere may also‘take the role of the other’ by ﬁlling gaps thatemerge when another sphere is weak, or unableor unwilling to enact its traditional role. In extension of the Triple Helix model, Carayannis and Campbell (2009) suggest a ‘Quadruple HelixInnovation System Framework’. Quadruple Helix, inthis context, means to add to the above stated helicesa ‘fourth helix’ that they identify as the ‘media-basedand culture-based public’. This fourth helix associates with ‘media’, ‘creative industries’, ‘culture’, ‘values’, ‘life styles’, ‘art’, and perhaps also the notion of the‘creative class’ (a term, coined by Florida, 2004). Thisshould emphasize that a broader understanding ofknowledge production and innovation applicationrequires that also the public becomes more integratedinto advanced innovation systems (Carayannis andCampbell, 2011). Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework places a stronger focus on cooperation in innovationand, in particular, the dynamically intertwined proc-esses of co-opetition, co-evolution,
innovationand, in particular, the dynamically intertwined proc-esses of co-opetition, co-evolution, and co-specialization within and across regional and sectoralinnovation ecosystems (Carayannis, 2008; Carayannisand Campbell, 2009, 2012) that could serve as thefoundation for diverse smart specialization strategies (and introduce a move towards systemic and user- centric innovation structures). This Quadruple Helix Innovation System Frame- work puts innovation users at its heart and encouragesthe development of innovations that are pertinent forusers (civil society). Users or citizens here own anddrive the innovation processes. Arnkil et al. (2010) maintain that the degree of user involvement could be deﬁned as inclusive of the ‘design by users’. In linewith this perspective, new innovative products, serv-ices and solutions are developed with the involvementof users in their role as lead users, co-developers, andco-creators. Furthermore, the Triple Helix concept refers to the ideas of ‘Mode 1’ and ‘Mode 2’ knowledge produc- tion. The ‘Mode 1’ approach is the model ofuniversity-based knowledge production, compatiblewith the linear model of innovation, whereas the‘Mode 2’ model, which emphasizes a knowledgeapplication and a knowledge-based problem-solving,appears to be also compatible with non-linearElias G. Carayannis, Evangelos Grigoroudis, David F. J. Campbell, Dirk Meissner and Dimitra Stamati 150 R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
innovation (Carayannis et al., 2017a). The enhanced model proposed by Carayannis and Campbell (2009) is called ‘Mode 3’ and incorporates the fourth actor, civil society, to form a Quadruple Helix InnovationSystem Framework. ‘Mode 3’ allows and emphasizes the co-existence and co-evolution of different knowl- edge and innovation paradigms. Moreover, the ‘Mode3’ Knowledge Production System is at the heart of the Fractal Research, Education and Innovation Ecosys- tem (FREIE). FREIE represents another conceptualview necessary to comprehend and manage the ‘Mode 3’ model as well as the Quadruple/Quintuple Innovation Helices. The ‘Mode 3’ model or Knowl-edge Production System, expands and extends the‘Mode 1’ and ‘Mode 2’ Knowledge Production Sys- tem architectures to propose and proﬁle the architec- ture of a helically conceptualized, dynamic, complex,and non-linear knowledge creation, diffusion, and use system endowed with higher-order learning (learning, learning-to-learn, and learning-to-learn-how-to-learn)capabilities that is well-aligned and supportive of the ‘Ecosystem as Helix’ perspective of regional co- opetitive ecosystems or CS2FIE2. The paper is organized in four more sections. The theoretical background of co-opetitive knowledge and its linkages with the Quadruple/Quintuple Helix Inno-vation System Framework is given in Section 2, including a detailed discussion about ‘Mode 3’ Knowledge Production System. Section 3 discusseshow the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Frame- work may be applied in regional innovation initia- tives. Section 4 presents a contextualization ofregional innovation systems within multi-level sys-tems of Quadruple Helix Innovation Systems and pro- poses spatial and non-spatial framings. Finally, Section 5 summarizes some concluding remarks. 2. Co-opetive knowledge and quadruple helix innovation system framework ‘Mode 1’ of knowledge production refers primarily to basic university research (basic research performed by the higher education
refers primarily to basic university research (basic research performed by the higher education sector) that is being organized in a disciplinary structure, and it is compatible withthe linear model of innovation, while ‘Mode 2’ focuses on knowledge application and a knowledge- based problem-solving that involves the followingprinciples: ‘knowledge produced in the context of application’; ‘trans-disciplinarity’; ‘heterogeneity and organizational diversity’; ‘social accountability andreﬂexivity’; and ‘quality control’ (Carayannis and Campbell, 2012). The Triple Helix innovation con- cept refers to the ideas of ‘Mode1’ and ‘Mode 2’knowledge production.The ‘Mode 3’ Knowledge Production System approach, proposed by Carayannis and Campbell (2009), consists of ‘Innovation Networks’ and ‘Knowledge Clusters’ for knowledge creation, diffu- sion, and use, expanding the concepts of ‘Mode 1’ and ‘Mode 2’ knowledge production systems. The ‘Mode 3’ is a multi-layered, multi-modal, multi- nodal, and multi-lateral system, encompassing mutu-ally complementary and reinforcing innovation net- works and knowledge clusters consisting of human and intellectual capital, shaped by social capital and underpinned by ﬁnancial capital. ‘Mode 3’, in combination with the broadened per- spective of the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework, emphasizes an innovation ecosystem that encourages the co-evolution of different knowledge and innovation modes, as well as balances non-linear innovation modes in the context of multi-level inno- vation systems (Carayannis and Campbell, 2009).Mercan and G €oktas¸ (2011) provide a deﬁnition about innovation ecosystems that is closely related to the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework: an innovation ecosystem consists of economic agents and economic relations as well as the non-economic parts such as technology, insti- tutions, sociological interactions, and the culture. As noted by Durst and Poutanen (2013), such an approach suggests that an
and the culture. As noted by Durst and Poutanen (2013), such an approach suggests that an innovation ecosystem is a hybrid of different networks or systems. Interaction between individuals or other entities (groups, organizations) plays a critical role in articu- lating and amplifying knowledge (Nonaka, 1995). In the classical literature of co-opetition and evolution- ary theories of the ﬁrms, the ﬁrm can be considered as a repository of knowledge (Nelson and Winter, 1982).The origin of the knowledge-based view of a ﬁrm is in the strategic management literature and resource- based view (Penrose, 1959) later expanded by others (Barney, 1991). Universities can also play a signiﬁcant role to the ‘co-opetitive’ knowledge creation, diffusion, and use. The traditional university business model was implicit in nature, comprising of a wide range of activities to achieve the core mission of teaching, research, and dissemination of knowledge into society (Gibb, 2010). Etzkowitz et al. (2000) note that the transition-ing university business model takes on a more ‘entre- preneurial role’. The resultant evolving university business model is, therefore, dependent upon multiple stakeholder relationships because the new remit is reliant upon the transference of knowledge and skills between universities, business and the widerThe ecosystem as helix R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 151 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
community (Lambert, 2003; Sainsbury Report, 2007; Wilson, 2012). However, Carayannis et al. (2017a) support that there is a new type of entrepreneurial university that has emerged, the ‘Mode 3’ university. The authors give the deﬁnition of this university as follows: A ‘Mode 3’ university, higher educational institute or higher educational system repre- sents a type of organization capable of higher order learning and in this regard, a type ofopen, highly complex and non-linear knowl- edge production system that seeks and realizes creative ways of combining, recombining and integrating different principles of knowledge production and knowledge application. Moreover, ‘Mode 3’ universities cross-reference their knowledge production and application also with ﬁrms (see Figure 2). The role of universities in regional economic devel- opment is frequent examined under the University Technology Transfer (UTT) concept, taking into account the increasingly complex network of regionalstakeholders. As emphasized by Miller et al. (2016),there is a need for more open and co-creational UTT, involving societal based innovation user stakeholders. Such an approach leads to a complex network of Quadruple Helix stakeholders involved at various stages throughout the UTT process. In order to exam- ine the dynamic and evolving nature of UTT, the authors emphasize the shift from a Triple into a Quad- ruple Helix Innovation System Framework. In addition, the ‘Mode 3’ model is related with an emerging fractal knowledge and innovation ecosys- tem, well conﬁgured for the knowledge economy (Carayannis and Campbell, 2009, p. 229). The authors emphasized the dynamically co-evolving, co-special- izing, and co-opetiting diverse and heterogeneous conﬁgurations of knowledge creation, diffusion, and use. The concept of fractal innovation ecosystems has been further elaborated and elucidated in the context of education, research, and innovation: the concept of the FREIE (Carayannis and Campbell, 2011).
of education, research, and innovation: the concept of the FREIE (Carayannis and Campbell, 2011). FREIE is a multilayered, multimodal, multi-nodal, and multi- lateral system encompassing mutually complemen- tary and reinforcing innovation networks and knowledge clusters consisting of human and intellec-tual capital, shaped by social capital and underpinned Figure 2. ‘Mode 3’ universities in co-opetitive entrepreneurial ecosystems. Source: Carayannis et al. (2017a).Elias G. Carayannis, Evangelos Grigoroudis, David F. J. Campbell, Dirk Meissner and Dimitra Stamati 152 R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
by ﬁnancial capital. ‘Mode 3’ allows and emphasizes the co-existence and coevolution of different knowl-edge and innovation paradigms, while in combinationwith the broadened perspective of the QuadrupleHelix Innovation System Framework emphasizes aninnovation ecosystem that encourages the co-evolution of different knowledge and innovationmodes, as well as balances non-linear innovationmodes in the context of multi-level innovation sys-tems (Carayannis and Campbell, 2009). Concluding, the ‘Mode 3’ and the Quadruple/Quin- tuple Innovation Helix Innovation System Frameworkcould serve as the foundation for diverse smart spe-cialization strategies as they place a stronger focus oncooperation in innovation, and in particular, thedynamically intertwined processes of co-opetition,coevolution, and co-specialization (further discussionabout the concepts of co-opetitive knowledge may befound in Brandenburger and Nalebuff, 1997). Byapplying a Quadruple/Quintuple Helix InnovationSystem Framework, regional policymakers are morelikely to enable a locus-centric and triple-bottom-line-centric entrepreneurial process of discovery followedby intensive experimentation as well as DEED lead-ing to high quantity and quality of sustainable as wellsocial innovation. 3. Quadruple helix innovation system framework in regional innovation 3.1. Developing Quadruple Helix-based regional policy initiatives The Europe 2020 strategy is a comprehensive eco- nomic policy agenda focusing on three priorities:smart, sustainable, and inclusive growth. The smartspecialization strategy adopted by the EU aims toexploit the socio-economic assets of a region, which can be developed and exploited worldwide in order to rapidly disseminate knowledge (Edwards et al.,2015). This is also referred as Research and Innova-tion Strategy for Smart Specialization (RIS3). Theprinciple of smart specialization requires regions tobuild on its own strengths and manage a priority-setting process in the context of national and
tobuild on its own strengths and manage a priority-setting process in the context of national and regionalinnovation strategies (European Commission, 2012). However, as emphasized by Edwards et al. (2015), additional work is still needed in order to achieve a common understanding of the notion of entrepreneur- ial discovery, and most important, on how to effec-tively operationalize it in the context of national andregional development policy and in a way that allowsfor lessons to be learnt and good practices to be trans-ferred across borders. In addition, during RIS3implementation, the activities, results, and policy out- put should be monitored with continuity in order tohave an effective feedback in the strategy revisionprocess. As a result, RIS3 may continuously adjustand adapt to changing conditions in the socio-economic context. One version of the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework was recently endorsed by theEuropean Commission in its ‘RIS3 Guide’. TheQuadruple Helix Innovation System Framework thuscan serve as an architectural innovation blueprint thatengages simultaneously four sectoral perspectives.The inter-sectoral and intra-sectoral, as well as theinter-regional and intra-regional knowledge andlearning interfaces that are embedded in the Quadru-ple Helix architectural blueprint determine its efﬁcacyand sustainability. A combination of these four per-spectives aims for the conceptualization, contextuali-zation, design, implementation, and evolution of(smart, sustainable, and inclusive) growth-drivingentrepreneurship and innovation ecosystems (as wellas clusters, networks, and other agglomerations) at theregional level (Carayannis and Rakhmatullin, 2014). The identiﬁcation and the roles of the innovation actors in a regional innovation system have beenextensively studied in the literature. The main aim ofthese studies is to examine the factors that contributeto a successful development of a regional innovationsystem, within a Quadruple Helix
that contributeto a successful development of a regional innovationsystem, within a Quadruple Helix Innovation SystemFramework. For example, Lew et al. (2016) examineinternational connections in order to explain thedynamics of the Trentino regional innovation sys-tems. Their ﬁndings justify the evolving role of theTriple Helix model and a shift toward the QuadrupleHelix Innovation System Framework. Civil society as the fourth pillar of the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework representsbottom-up actions and views of the civil society.However, to beneﬁt from these, policymakers shouldensure mechanisms such as crowd-sourcing andcrowd-funding capabilities in instruments and initia-tives. Embedding these elements may allow for faster,broader, cheaper, and more resilient learning,learning-to learn, and learning-to learn-how-to-learndynamics. In addition, the social networking capabil-ities enacted via the fourth pillar would enhance thelikelihood and impact of knowledge serendipity andknowledge arbitrage events (happy accidents). Thesehappy accidents would then act as triggers, catalysts,and accelerators of exploration and exploitationdynamics that could substantially empower anyQuadruple Helix strategy. Carayannis and Rakhmatullin (2014) present some characteristic examples of excellence from the NordicThe ecosystem as helix R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 153 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
countries regarding the adoption of the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework: (1) The Start-Up Sauna: It is a business accelera- tor (still run by young enthusiasts but nowfunded by government, business, and aca-demia) that occupies a dilapidated warehouse next to the Aalto University. (2) Linas Matkasse: It is a company co-founded by Niklas Aronsson that applies the IKEA’sdo-it-yourself model to family dinners. Thecompany delivers bags containing all theingredients needed for a meal, chopped upand ready to cook. This example demonstrates that many of the region’s most interesting entrepreneurs operate at the low end of thetech spectrum. (3) Asunto Oy Helsingin Loppukiri: It is a Fin- nish private housing association that has builta housing community in the suburbs of Hel-sinki. The idea is to reinvent retirement homes for baby-boomers. (4) Rovio Entertainment: It is known for Angry Birds, a game that involves catapulting irasci-ble avians at elaborate fortresses constructedby evil pigs. Carayannis and Rakhmatullin ( 2014) support that successful research and innovation strategies cannot beeffectively formulated and implemented without put-ting in place a functioning multi-level governancestructure. As noted by Carayannis (2008), at the heartof the design, implementation and leveraging of such initiatives are strategic knowledge arbitrage and seren- dipity (SKARSE). The term strategic knowledge seren-dipity refers to the unintended beneﬁts of enablingknowledge to ‘spill over’ between employees, groups,and functional domains (‘happy accidents’ in learning),while strategic knowledge arbitrage represents thecapacity to create, identify, reallocate, and recombineknowledge assets better and/or faster (see Figure 3). Considering the different levels of clusters, two major perspectives appear. From an actor perspectiveit becomes obvious that regional strategies based onthe Triple Helix model in open regional innovationsystems are required. From the systems
based onthe Triple Helix model in open regional innovationsystems are required. From the systems perspective, itshows that coherence at higher (international/global) level to use dynamic economies of scale is essential, therefore multi-level governance is needed, for exam-ple, strategic convergence between actors at differentpolicy levels has to be fostered. In conclusion, itseems that smart specialization is a strategy that canhelp any region move forward to innovation and if itis used through the right elements such as clusters, itcan become one powerful tool within the context of the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework. 3.2. Co-creation of regional innovation business models within a ‘Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework’ The Living Lab is an approach that gained attention among several scholars in which all four important Figure 3. Strategic knowledge, serendipity, and arbitrage (SKARSETM) in action. [Colour ﬁgure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com] Source: Carayannis (2008).Elias G. Carayannis, Evangelos Grigoroudis, David F. J. Campbell, Dirk Meissner and Dimitra Stamati 154 R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
actor groups of the Quadruple Helix Innovation Sys- tem Framework are actively present. Several charac- teristic examples of the Living Lab approach may be found in the literature. Laurea is a R&D oriented university of applied sci- ences, which operates in the Helsinki metropolitan area and it is focused on service innovations. As notedby Hirvikoski (2016), Laurea’s strategic choice is to integrate three tasks: education, R&D, and regional development. The R&D activities are focused on wel-fare, knowledge intensive business services, and social responsibility. In this context, the Learning by Developing (LbD) model has been developed as atool for reaching its strategic goals and implementing them in practice. Through its several locations and its LbD-based innovation process Laurea acts both as ahost organization for a few Living Labs, and as an innovation service provider in Living Lab context. The Alcotra Innovation Strategic Project is another interesting example, funded under the Alcotra Pro-gramme. The program pursued two major objectives (Alcotra Innovation, 2013): establish cross-border Living Labs as a way for improving the competitive-ness and innovation capacities of the territories and sensitize policy makers to the Living Lab approach. In a ﬁrst phase of the project, each region organizedlocal workshops with the purpose of raising awareness of the Quadruple Helix stakeholders and the cross- border Living Lab’s idea. New patterns of territorial(smart) specialization have been identiﬁed with the support of the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework (see Figure 4 for the project’s BusinessModel Canvas). Another interesting project is the Arctic smart city Living Lab, aiming to build an operational model as apromoting (dynamic, strategic, and transformative) process meant for the public city organization (Iivari, 2016). The entire city functions as a Living Lab scenewith the principles of anticipatory, future-oriented action learning. Thus, the
a Living Lab scenewith the principles of anticipatory, future-oriented action learning. Thus, the operational model can be seen as a business model for the city (see more detailsin Iivari, 2016). The Quadruple/Quintuple Helix Innovation System Frameworks have been applied in several empiricalstudies in order to better understand the examined innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystems: the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Frameworkemphasizes the importance of civil society (Kahn,2016) or of political structures (Kimatu, 2016), while the Quintuple Helix Innovation System Framework focuses more on the environment and sustainability(Rosenlund et al., 2015, 2017). Although several stud- ies have examined the Quadruple/Quintuple Helix Innovation System Framework, all these researchefforts are basically empirical works that examinespeciﬁc (and limited) aspects of these approaches. For example, Carayannis et al. (2017b) revisit the nationaland regional Innovation Scoreboards by consideringthe different preferences of innovation stakeholders under the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Frame- work. They emphasize that such an approach givesthe ability to develop policies and practices orientedtoward speciﬁc Quadruple Helix actors. In a differentcontext, Carayannis et al. (2016b) present an inte-grated assessment and classiﬁcation framework fornational and regional innovation efﬁciency. Follow- ing Schumpeter’s (1934) deﬁnition for innovation, the proposed multistage approach considers the differentstages of knowledge production and commercializa-tion, while the coexistence and coevolution ofnational and regional innovation systems are modeledthrough a multilevel approach. Efﬁciency results areexamined under the Quadruple Helix Innovation Sys- tem Framework in order to examine how factors related to the Quadruple Helix actors affect the esti-mated national/regional performance. As noted byCarayannis et al. (2016b), such an approach may pro-vide a valuable tool for
As noted byCarayannis et al. (2016b), such an approach may pro-vide a valuable tool for country/region comparisonand policy formulation, while giving insight in under-standing the nature and dynamics of innovation pro- cess at its different stages and levels. 4. Multi-level innovation systems and Quadruple Helix Innovation SystemFramework 4.1. Contextualization of regional innovation systems It is interesting to note that a ‘region’ is not necessar- ily a standardized term or concept. ‘Regional’ orregion can have at least two meanings: (1) Regional may refer to (sub-national) local units or entities. This represents a typicalapproach within European Union (EU) lan-guage, where a region may also cut acrossnation-state (EU member state) borders. (2) But regional can also address clusters or agglomerations of different nation states (i.e.,the Region of Latin America) (see, e.g.,Peters, 1998). It is reasonable to argue that an analysis, based on the concept of regional innovation systems, shouldactually be framed conceptually wider and broaderwithin the context of ‘multi-level innovation sys-tems’. Multi-level governance ‘de-nationalizes’ our view and assessment of processes. By this, the logical departure for regional innovation systems are not theThe ecosystem as helix R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 155 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
regions, but the more-wider understood ‘multi-level’ architectures in innovation. ‘Multi-level systems’ requires a need for deﬁning, what a system is andwhat possible characteristics of ‘multi-level’ are. Bengt-A ˚ke Lundvall paraphrased Boulding (1985) by saying that a system could be seen as the opposite to chaos. In more detail, Lundvall (1992, p. 2) mentions: Somewhat more speciﬁcally, a system is con- stituted by a number of elements and by the relationships between these elements. In the words of Kuhlmann (2001, p. 955), a system is:As a system we understand a conglomeration of actors, institutions and processes all func- tionally bound together, whereby certain char-acteristic core functions of each form thedemarcation criteria against other societal(sub)systems. In the process of a deﬁnition of a system, often two aspects are coming together: the elements of a system,and the self-rational of a system. With the logic of thisparticular approach, the following deﬁnition can beoffered for a system (Campbell, 2001, p. 426;Carayannis et al., 2016a, p. 4): Figure 4. Business model canvas of Alcotra Innovation project. Source: Alcotra Innovation (2013).Elias G. Carayannis, Evangelos Grigoroudis, David F. J. Campbell, Dirk Meissner and Dimitra Stamati 156 R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
(1) Elements: systems consist of elements (parts); (2) Self-rationale: systems have a mode of opera- tion, a self-rationale (logic, self-logic), which organizes the self-organization and reproduc-tion of a system and the relationship betweenthe elements within a system and, further-more, the relationship between the system andthe other systems. In innovation theory, networks and clusters are important. ‘Innovation networks’ and ‘knowledgeclusters’ introduce new perspectives. Networksunderscore the importance of boundary-transcendinginterlinkages in inter-disciplinary, trans-disciplinary,and trans-sectoral formats. The concept of sectoralsystems of innovation (Malerba, 2002, 2004) alsorelates to ideas of clusters and networks. Smart citiesor knowledge cities represent another example for knowledge clusters. This puts forward the demand and requirement to conceptually bride networks andclusters with systems (and systems theory), leading tosomething like networks of innovation networks andknowledge clusters. If a system is embedded by alarger system, then this system qualiﬁes to be inter-preted as a cluster or an element of a larger meta-system. Furthermore, elements or clusters within asystem could be tested if they also qualify to be con- sidered being a subsystem (or micro-system). This clearly expresses fractal characteristics in structureand process (see Figure 5). As K €ubler (2015) elaborates, multi-level architec- tures or multi-level governance in the EU is beingdriven by three main trends, occurring and interactingin interwoven formats at the same time. For K €ubler, multi-level governance is closely associated with de- nationalization, strengthening the supranational level,but also the regions (regional clusters) and civil society. The Triple Helix innovation model focuses clearly on the university–industry–government relations(Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff, 2000). In this regard, theTriple Helix represents a basic model for knowledge production and innovation
In this regard, theTriple Helix represents a basic model for knowledge production and innovation application (in the knowl- edge economy). Contrary to this, the Quadruple/Quin-tuple Helix Innovation System Frameworks are set upin a way to comprehend the complexity in knowledgeproduction and knowledge application. Therefore, theanalytical architectures of Quadruple Helix and Quin-tuple Helix are conceptually broader. The conceptual building blocks of the Quadruple/ Quintuple Helix Innovation System Framework allowto enrich and to augment the designs and architecturesof multi-level innovation systems in multi-facettedways, in order to additionally contextualize the under-standings and the meanings of regional innovationsystems adequately. 4.2. Spatial and non-spatial framings and implications In a spatial context, the multi-level system approach can address different layers, such as global, suprana- tional, national, regional, and local. The national sys- tem of innovation represents here one of the coreunderstandings. Lundvall (1992, p. 2) deﬁnes thenational innovation system in the following way: It follows that a system of innovation is con- stituted by elements and relationships whichinteract in the production, diffusion and use ofnew, and economically useful, knowledge and that a national system encompasses elements and relationships, either located within orrooted inside the borders of a nation state ... it is obvious that the national system of inno- vation is a social system. A central activity inthe system of innovation is learning, andlearning is a social activity, which involves interaction between people. In this regard, Lundvall (1992, p. 4) depicted the modern Western nation states as ‘engines of growth’.But despite this focus on the national level, Lundvall was from the beginning explicit, by acknowledging the global, but also the regional levels and dimensionsof innovation. Both globalisation and regionalisation might be interpreted as processes which
innovation. Both globalisation and regionalisation might be interpreted as processes which weaken the Figure 5. A formalized deﬁnition of systems, knowledge clus- ters, and innovation networks.Source: Authors’ own conceptualization (adapted Carayannis et al., 2016a, p. 9).The ecosystem as helix R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 157 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
coherence and importance of national sys- tems. (Lundvall, 1992, p. 3) So, by this, it could be argued that Lundvall framed his ideas of a national innovation system already fromthe beginning within the context of multi-level archi- tectures, meaning it does not make sense to talk about a national level without acknowledging global and(subnational) regional and local levels. Therefore, when Lundvall asserts that a concept of a national innovation system is meaninglesswithout the (multi-level) in-parallel identiﬁcationof the global and regional levels, the same also applies to the perspective and point-of-departure from the regional level: reference to and use of theconcept of regional innovation systems requiresthat these regional systems must be contextualized within the framework of multi-level innovation systems. Regional innovation systems are being set up on a more sustainable basis and are being enhanced by making them broader and by incorporating considera-tions and elements of the Quadruple/Quintuple HelixInnovation System Framework. This already has been veriﬁed in several recent ﬁeld studies, focusing often on case studies from the Scandinavian or Nordic coun-tries (see Grundel and Dahlstr €om, 2016; Kolehmainen et al., 2016). The idea of a spatial (regional or national) inno- vation and entrepreneurial ecosystem also assumesa co-evolution of different subsystems, for example the innovation system and the entrepreneurial system:The spatial (regional or national) innovation and entrepreneurial ecosystem is an opencomplex dynamic system with a framework,where a speciﬁc institutional environment ofan innovative type is formed, and which takes into account the national (regional) economic interests and contributes to the activation andenhancement of innovations, technologiesand human capital. (Dubina et al., 2017,p. 438) In empirical terms, a spatial innovation and entre- preneurial ecosystem was discussed and applied for aRussian case study. Despite those
and entre- preneurial ecosystem was discussed and applied for aRussian case study. Despite those spatial examples of multi-level inno- vation systems, also a non-spatial further elaborationof multi-level innovation systems is possible. The spa-tial approach suggests different forms and ways of aspatial (geographical) aggregation of a multi-level innovation system. But this is not the only option for an aggregation. Aggregation may also mean to iden-tify different functional systems or sub-systems, andthen to consider, which of these are more focused orbroader in their analytical range and ramiﬁcations. In that sense, we could work along the ‘research axis’ or ‘research branch’ of a multi-level innovation system,by starting with the research system. In Figure 6, a two-dimensional aggregation of multi-level innovation systems is proposed. The spa-tial (geographical) axis is being compared with a non-spatial (research-based) functional axis. ‘Emphasizing the ‘research axis’ of knowledge, we can apply more speciﬁcally the multi-level logic by referring to multi- Figure 6. Multi-level systems of innovation: functional (non-spatial) and geographical (spatial) aggregation. Source: Adapted from Carayannis et al. (2016a, p. 12).Elias G. Carayannis, Evangelos Grigoroudis, David F. J. Campbell, Dirk Meissner and Dimitra Stamati 158 R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
level systems of innovation and want to propose two particular directions of further aggregation’ (Camp-bell, 2006). Functionally, the aggregation may move from R&D to S&T and ﬁnally to innovation; and geographically, the aggregation may take thedirection from subnational (local) to nationaland transnational (supranational, global).(Carayannis et al., 2016a, p. 11) This two-dimensional exercise in Figure 6 could of course be extended (and diversiﬁed) also to an n-dimensional aggregation of multi-level innovationsystems. 5. Concluding remarks In this paper, we aim to explore the validity of view-ing an ecosystem as a helix. Speciﬁcally, we aim toexplore the extent and validity between an ecosystemand the Quadruple/Quintuple Helix Innovation Sys-tem Framework. In this manner, we aim to provide a theoretical framework for the study and design of regional and sectoral co-opetitive innovation ecosys-tems embedded within a Quadruple/Quintuple Helixcontext. In this context, we have proposed and pro-ﬁled the introduction and use of the Quadruple/Quin-tuple Innovation Helix System Framework as anenabler and enactor of innovation and entrepreneur-ship ecosystems in general and Regional/Sectoral Co-opetitive Ecosystems in particular to model, explicate, and predict the nature and dynamics of the role and behavior of the constituent elements of said ecosys-tems, namely government, university, industry, andcivil society entities operating within a triple bottomline (social, ﬁnancial, and environmental excellence)mandate. Our research to date has revealed the potential and promise of such an approach as a facilitator and ena- bler of more effective and efﬁcient socio-economic,socio-political, and socio-technical dynamic and com-plex conﬁgurations of tangible and intangible resour-ces with an entrepreneurial and innovativepredilection and propensity. In particular, we highlighted and showcased this in our paper via regional business model innovation cases-in-point and we
and showcased this in our paper via regional business model innovation cases-in-point and we demonstrated the value ofdeveloping the concept of Co-opetitive Spatial andSectoral Fractal Innovation and Entrepreneurial Eco-systems (CS2FIE2). We aim to continue our concep-tual and empirical, qualitative, and quantitativeresearch to further highlight the challenges andopportunities intrinsic in the development, explora- tion, exploitation, and deployment of highly efﬁca- cious entrepreneurial ecosystems. Our focus will remain on the research and develop- ment of more powerful and representative metrics and measurements as proxies of the anatomy and function- ality of said ecosystems as well as the identiﬁcation, parameterization, and calibration of qualitative as wellas quantitative representations across time and space of the performance of ecosystems as Quadruple/Quintuple Helices. In so doing, we aim to overcome current limi-tations regarding validity, reliability, and generalizabil- ity that emanate from current region-constrained and case-speciﬁc metrics and measurements. Acknowledgements The article was partially prepared within the frame- work of the Basic Research Program at the National Research University Higher School of Economics (HSE) and partially supported within the framework of the subsidy granted to the HSE by the Governmentof the Russian Federation for the implementation of the Global Competitiveness Program. References Alcotra Innovation (2013) Alcotra Innovation Experience Handbook: how to set up cross-border Living Labs. Available at: http://www.alcotra-innovation.eu/living- Labs/dwd/Alcotra_Innovazione_ Handbook_2013.pdf Arnkil, R., J €arvensivu, A., Koski, P., and Piirainen, T. (2010) Exploring Quadruple Helix: outlining user-oriented innovation models, Final Report on Quadruple Helix Research for the CLIQ project, Working Paper 85/ 2010. University of Tampere, Tampere. Available
Research for the CLIQ project, Working Paper 85/ 2010. University of Tampere, Tampere. Available at:https://tampub.uta.ﬁ/bitstream/handle/10024/65758/978-951-44-8209-0.pdf?sequence 51 Barney, J.B. (1991) Firm resources and sustained competi- tive advantage. Journal of Management ,17, 99–120. Boulding, K.E. (1985) The World as a Total System .B e v - erly Hills, CA: Sage. Brandenburger, A. and Nalebuff, B.J. (1997) Co-Opetition . New York: Doubleday. Campbell, D.F.J. (2001) Politische Steuerung €uber €offentliche F €orderung universit €arer Forschung? System- theoretische €Uberlegungen zu Forschungs- und Techno- logiepolitik (Political steering through public support ofuniversity research? Systems-theoretical considerationsabout research and technology policy]. €Osterreichische Zeitschrift f €ur Politikwissenschaft (Austrian Journal of Political Science) ,30, 425–438. Campbell, D.F.J. (2006) The university/business research networks in science and technology: knowledge produc-tion trends in the United States, European Union andThe ecosystem as helix R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 159 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Japan. In: Carayannis, E.G. and Campbell, D.F.J. (eds), Knowledge Creation, Diffusion and Use in InnovationNetworks and Knowledge Clusters . Westport, CT: Praeger. pp. 67–100. Carayannis, E.G. (2008) Knowledge-driven creative destruction, or leveraging knowledge for competitiveadvantage: strategic knowledge arbitrage and serendipity as real options drivers triggered by co-opetition, co-evo- lution and co-specialization. Journal of Industry and Higher Education ,22, 343–353. Carayannis, E.G. and Campbell, D.F.J. (2009) “Mode 3” and “Quadruple Helix”: toward a 21st century fractalinnovation ecosystem. International Journal of Technol- ogy Management ,46, 201–234. Carayannis, E.G. and Campbell, D.F.J. (2011) Open inno- vation diplomacy and a 21st century Fractal Research,Education and Innovation (FREIE) ecosystem: buildingon the Quadruple and Quintuple Helix Innovation con-cepts and the “Mode 3” Knowledge Production System.Journal of the Knowledge Economy ,2, 327–372. Carayannis, E.G. and Campbell, D.F.J. (2012) Mode 3 Knowledge Production in Quadruple Helix InnovationSystems: 21st Century Democracy, Innovation, andEntrepreneurship for Development . New York, NY: Springer Briefs in Business, Springer. Carayannis, E.G., Campbell, D.F.J., and Rehman, S.S. (2016a) Mode 3 knowledge production: systems and sys-tems theory, clusters and networks. Journal of Innova- tion and Entrepreneurship ,5, 1–24. Carayannis, E.G., Campbell, D.F.J., Grigoroudis, E., Meissner, D., and Stamati, D. (2017a) “Mode 3” univer- sities and academic ﬁrms: thinking beyond the box trans- disciplinarity and non-linear innovation dynamics withinco-opetitive entrepreneurial ecosystems. International Jour- nal of Technology Management . Available at: http://www. inderscience.com/info/ingeneral/forthcoming.php?jcode= ijtm Carayannis, E.G., Goletsis, Y., and Grigoroudis, E. (2017b) Composite innovation metrics: MCDA and the quadrupleinnovation helix framework. Technological Forecasting and Social Change .
MCDA and the quadrupleinnovation helix framework. Technological Forecasting and Social Change . Available at: http://www.sciencedirect. com/science/article/pii/S0040162517303232 Carayannis, E.G., Grigoroudis, E., and Goletsis, Y. (2016b) A multilevel and multistage efﬁciency evaluation ofinnovation systems: a multiobjective DEA approach.Expert Systems with Applications ,62,6 3 – 8 0 . Carayannis, E.G. and Rakhmatullin, R. (2014) The Quadru- ple/Quintuple Innovation Helixes and smart specialisa-tion strategies for sustainable and inclusive growth inEurope and beyond. Journal of the Knowledge Economy , 5, 212–239. Carayannis, E.G. and Campbell, D.F.J. (2010) Triple Helix, Quadruple Helix and Quintuple Helix and how doknowledge, innovation and the environment relate toeach other? A proposed framework for a trans-discipli-nary analysis of sustainable development and social ecology. International Journal of Social Ecology and Sustainable Development ,1,4 1 – 6 9 . Dubina, I.N., Campbell, D.F.J., Carayannis, E.G., Chub, A.A., Grigoroudis, E., and Kozhevina, O.V. (2017) Thebalanced development of the spatial innovation and entrepreneurial ecosystem based on principles of the sys- tems compromise: a conceptual framework. Journal of the Knowledge Economy ,8, 438–455. Durst, S. and Poutanen, P. (2013) Success factors of inno- vation ecosystems: a literature review. In: Smeds, R. and Irrmann, O. (eds), CO-CREATE 2013: The Boundary- Crossing Conference on CoDesign in Innovation . Espoo, Finland: Aalto University Publication series SCIEN- CE1TECHNOLOGY 15/2013. pp. 27–38. Edwards, J., Gianelle, C., Kyriakou, D., and Midtkandal, I. (2015) Smart specialisation for regional economic trans-formation. Asia-Paciﬁc Tech Monitor ,32, 13–18. Etzkowitz, H., Gulbrandsen, M., and Levitt, J. (2000) Pub- lic Venture Capital: Government Funding Sources forTechnology Entrepreneurs . New York: Harcourt-Brace. Etzkowitz, H. and Leydesdorff, L. (2000) The dynamics of innovation: from national
Harcourt-Brace. Etzkowitz, H. and Leydesdorff, L. (2000) The dynamics of innovation: from national systems and “Mode 2” to a Triple Helix of university-industry-government relations. Research Policy ,29, 109–123. European Commission. (2012) Guide to research report and innovation strategies for Smart Specialisations (RIS3), European Union, Luxembourg. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/docgener/presenta/smart_specialisation/smart_ris3_2012.pdf Florida, R. (2004) The Rise of the Creative Class and How It’s Transforming Work, Leisure, Community and Every- day Life . New York: Basic Books. Gibb, A. (2010) Towards the Entrepreneurial University: Entrepreneurship Education as a Lever for Change .B i r - mingham: The National Council for Graduate Entrepreneurship. Grundel, I. and Dahlstr €om, M. (2016) A Quadruple and Quintuple Helix approach to regional innovation systems in the transformation to a forestry-based bioeconomy. Journal of the Knowledge Economy ,7, 963–983. Hirvikoski, T. (2016) Laurea Living Labs network, Euro- pean Network of Living Labs (ENoLL). Available at: http://www.openlivinglabs.eu/sites/enoll.org/ﬁles/Laurea_ Living_Labs_Network_0.pdf Iivari, M. (2016) Exploring business models in ecosystemic contexts. Acta Universitatis Ouluensis , 84, University of Oulu. Available at: http://jultika.oulu.ﬁ/ﬁles/ isbn9789526212401.pdf Kahn, M. (2016) Mitigating South Africa’s HIV epidemic: the interplay of social entrepreneurship and the innova- tion system. Minerva ,54, 129–150. Kimatu, J.N. (2016) Evolution of strategic interactions from the triple to quad helix innovation models for sus-tainable development in the era of globalization. Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship ,5,1 – 7 . Kolehmainen, J., Irvine, J., Stewart, L., Karacsonyi, Z., Szab /C19o, T., Alarinta, J., and Norberg, A. (2016) Quadru- ple Helix, innovation and the knowledge-based develop- ment: lessons from remote, rural and less-favoured regions. Journal of the
knowledge-based develop- ment: lessons from remote, rural and less-favoured regions. Journal of the Knowledge Economy ,7, 23–42. Kuhlmann, S. (2001) Future governance of innovation pol- icy in Europe: three scenarios. Research Policy ,30, 953–976.Elias G. Carayannis, Evangelos Grigoroudis, David F. J. Campbell, Dirk Meissner and Dimitra Stamati 160 R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
K€ubler, D. (2015) De-nationalization and multi-level gov- ernance. In: Braun, D. and Maggetti, M. (eds), Compara- tive Politics: Theoretical and Methodological Challenges . Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. pp. 55–89. Lambert, R. (2003) Lambert review of business-university collaboration, London H.M. Treasury. Available at:http://www.eua.be/eua/jsp/en/upload/lambert_review_ﬁnal_ 450.1151581102387.pdf Lew, Y.K., Khan, Z., and Cozzio, S. (2016) Gravitating toward the quadruple helix: international connections for the enhancement of a regional innovation system in North- east Italy. R&D Management , doi: 10.1111/radm.12227 Lundvall, B.A. (1992) National Systems of Innovation: Towards a Theory of Innovation and Interactive Learn- ing. London: Pinter Publishers. Malerba, F. (2002) Sectoral systems of innovation and pro- duction. Research Policy ,31, 247–264. Malerba, F. (2004) Sectoral Systems of Innovation: con- cepts, Issues and Analyses of Six Major Sectors in Europe . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. M e r c a n ,B .a n dG €oktas¸, D. (2011) Components of innovation ecosystems: a cross-country study. International Research Journal of Finance and Economics ,76, 102–112. Miller, K., McAdam, R., and McAdam, M. (2016) A sys- tematic literature review of university technology trans- fer from a quadruple helix perspective: toward a research agenda. R&D Management , doi: 10.1111/ radm.12228 Nelson, R.R. and Winter, S.G. (1982) An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Nonaka, I. (1995) The Knowledge-Creating Company . New York: Oxford Press. Penrose, E.G. (1959) The Theory of the Growth of the Firm . New York: Wiley. Peters, B.G. (1998) Comparative Politics: Theory and Methods . London: Macmillan. Rosenlund, J., Hogland, W., Johansson, A.W., and Seddon, J. (2015) A cross-national environmental cluster collabo-ration: shifting between an analytical and management level of the triple helix. Science and Public Policy ,42, 583–593.
an analytical and management level of the triple helix. Science and Public Policy ,42, 583–593. Rosenlund, J., Rosell, E., and Hogland, W. (2017) Over- coming the triple helix boundaries in an environmental research collaboration. Science and Public Policy ,44, 153–162. Sainsbury Report (2007) The race to the top: a review of government’s science and innovation policies, HMSO. Available at: http://www.rsc.org/images/sainsbury_ review051007_tcm18-103118.pdf Schumpeter, J.A. (1934) The Theory of Economic Develop- ment . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Wilson, T. (2012) A review of business-university collabo- ration, Higher Education Funding Council for England.Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/ system/uploads/attachment_ data/ﬁle/32383/12–610-wil- son-review-business-university-collaboration.pdf Elias G. Carayannis is Full Professor of Science, Technology, Innovation and Entrepreneurship, aswell as co-Founder and co-Director of the Global and Entrepreneurial Finance Research Institute (GEFRI) and Director of Research on Science, Technology, Innovation and Entrepreneurship, European Union Research Center, (EURC) at the School of Business of the George Washington University in Washington, DC. Dr Carayannis’ teaching and research activities focus on the areas of strategic Government- University-Industry R&D partnerships, technology road-mapping, technology transfer and commerciali- zation, international science and technology policy, technological entrepreneurship and regional eco- nomic development. Dr Carayannis has several publi-cations in both academic and practitioner journals, including IEEE Transactions in Engineering Man- agement, Research Policy, Journal of R&D Manage- ment, Journal of Engineering and Technology Management, International Journal of Technology Management, Technovation, Journal of Technology Transfer, Engineering Management Journal, Journal of Growth and Change, Review of Regional Studies among others. Evangelos
Journal, Journal of Growth and Change, Review of Regional Studies among others. Evangelos Grigoroudis is Associate Professor on management of quality processes in the School of Production Engineering and Management of the Technical University of Crete, Greece (2002 2). He has received distinctions from the Hellenic Opera- tional Research Society, the Academy of Business and Administrative Sciences, the World Automation Congress, the Foundation of Ioannis and Vasileia Karayianni, the Technical University of Crete, and the State Scholarships Foundation of Greece. He acts as reviewer for more than 60 scientiﬁc journals, and he is associate editor and member of the Editorial Board of the several scientiﬁc journals. He is author/ editor of 17 books on the measurement of service quality, the business strategy and management, and the multicriteria decision aid approaches, as well as of a signiﬁcant number of research reports and papers in scientiﬁc journals and conference proceedings. David F. J. Campbell is a Research Fellow (Senior Scientist) at the Institute of Science Communication and Higher Education Research (WIHO), Faculty for Interdisciplinary Studies (iff), Alpen-Adria- University of Klagenfurt; Lecturer and ‘Privat- Dozent’ in Political Science at the University of Vienna; and a Quality Enhancement Expert and Quality Researcher at the University of Applied Arts in Vienna. He studied political science at the Univer- sity of Vienna. In 2014, Campbell received a ‘Habili- tation’ (Doctor Habilitatus) from the University of Vienna with a Venia Docendi for Comparative Politi- cal Science. His articles on knowledge, innovation,The ecosystem as helix R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 161 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley
See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
knowledge economy and democracy (knowledge democracy and quality of democracy) have been published in several international journals. Campbell teaches (taught) at the University of Klagenfurt, Uni-versity of Vienna, University of Applied Arts Vienna and George Washington University in Washington D.C. (Elliott School of International Affairs). Dirk Meissner has 15 years of experience in research and teaching technology and innovation management and policy. Prior to joining the NationalResearch University-Higher School of Economics, he was responsible for technology and innovation policy at the presidential ofﬁce of the Swiss Scienceand Technology Council. He also has long experi- ence in top level consulting to key decision makers in industry, headed the business unit industry studiesand research with T.A. Cook Consultants which he successfully established and was management con- sultant for technology and innovation managementwith Arthur D. Little. He is and was member ofinternational working groups on technology and innovation policy. Dr Meissner represented Switzer- land and now the Russian Federation at the OECD Working Party on Technology and Innovation Policy.His research interests include new business develop- ment, competitive intelligence, innovation and tech- nology policy, innovation management audits,processes and organizational restructuring, R&D management, and R&D strategies. Dimitra Stamati is PhD candidate at the Technical University of Crete, School of Production Engineer- ing and Management. She received her B.S. and M.Sc. degree from the University of Piraeus, Depart-ment of Digital Systems (2014) and the Harokopion University of Athens in Advanced Information Sys- tems in Business (2016, respectively, and completedher internship at Altec Integration S.A. Her research interests include business process management, serv- ice oriented architecture, cloud computing, and newtechnologies.Elias G. Carayannis, Evangelos Grigoroudis, David F. J. Campbell,
computing, and newtechnologies.Elias G. Carayannis, Evangelos Grigoroudis, David F. J. Campbell, Dirk Meissner and Dimitra Stamati 162 R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The ecosystem as helix: an exploratory theory-buildingstudy of regional co-opetitiveentrepreneurial ecosystems asQuadruple/Quintuple HelixInnovation Models Elias G. Carayannis1, Evangelos Grigoroudis2, David F. J. Campbell3,4, Dirk Meissner5and Dimitra Stamati2 1Department of Information Systems and Technology Management School of Business, The George Washington University, Duque `s Hall, Funger Hall, Suite 515C, 2201 G Street, NW, Washington, DC 20052, USA. caraye@gwu.edu 2School of Production Engineering and Management, University Campus, Technical University of Crete, Kounoupidiana, Chania 73100, Greece. vangelis@ergasya.tuc.gr; dimitrastamati22@gmail.com 3Faculty for Interdisciplinary Studies (iff), Institute of Science Communication and Higher Education Research (WIHO), Alpen-Adria-University Klagenfurt, Schottenfeldgasse 29, Vienna A-1070, Austria david.campbell@aau.at 4Unit for Quality Enhancement (UQE), University of Applied Arts Vienna, Oskar Kokoschka-Platz 2, Vienna A-1010, Austria. david.campbell@unik.ac.at 5National Research University Higher School of Economics, Myasnitskaya Street, 9/11, Moscow 101000, Russia. dmeissner@hse.ru Regions are increasingly being viewed as eco-systemic agglomerations of organizational and institutional entities or stakeholders with socio-technical, socio-economic, and socio-political conﬂicting as well as converging (co-opetitive) goals, priorities, expectations, andbehaviors that they pursue via entrepreneurial development, exploration, exploitation,and deployment actions, reactions and interactions. In this context, our paper aims toexplore and proﬁle the nature and dynamics of the Quadruple/Quintuple Helix InnovationSystem Model or Framework (government, university, industry, civil society, environ-ment) as an enabler and enactor of regional co-opetitive entrepreneurial ecosystems whichwe conceptualize as fractal, multi-level, multi-modal, multi-nodal, and multi-lateral con-ﬁgurations of dynamic tangible and intangible
multi-modal, multi-nodal, and multi-lateral con-ﬁgurations of dynamic tangible and intangible assets within the resource-based view andthe new theory of the growth of the ﬁrm. Co-opetitive fractal innovation and entrepre-neurship ecosystems are deﬁned and discussed, and examples of regional innovation 148 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
policies and programs are presented. Furthermore, the concept of multi-level innovation systems is analyzed, taking into account the existence of knowledge clusters and innova- tion networks, while alternative aggregations of multi-level innovation systems are proposed based on their spatial (geographical) and non-spatial (research-based) functionalproperties. 1. Introduction In this paper, we envision regions as eco-systemic agglomerations of organizational and institutional entities or stakeholders with socio-technical, socio- economic, and socio-political conﬂicting as well as converging (co-opetitive) goals, priorities, expecta-tions, and behaviors that they pursue via entrepreneur- ial development, exploration, exploitation, and deployment (DEED) actions, reactions, and interac-tions. In particular, we aim to study and represent the role, nature and dynamics of regional co-opetitive fractal ecosystems via the spectrum of an extendedversion of the Triple Helix, that of the Quadruple/ Quintuple Helix Innovation System Framework (see Figure 1), which is an agglomeration of ﬁrms, institu-tions, and other stakeholders intertwined via a helical, dynamic, complex, non-linear, self-similar (fractal), and self-organizing higher-order learning architectureof a knowledge production system [the ‘Mode 3’ Knowledge Production System which we discuss later (Carayannis and Campbell, 2009)]. This type of eco-systems we have named Co-opetitive Spatial andSectoral Fractal Innovation and Entrepreneurial Eco- systems (CS2FIE2). The main aim of the paper is to explore the extent and validity of equivalence of the ecosystem view of knowledge creation, diffusion and use with that of the Quadruple/Quintuple Helix Innovation SystemFramework and in this manner, provide a theoretical framework of regional co-opetitive innovation eco- systems within a Quadruple/Quintuple Helix contextas well as discuss current and future research agenda issues. In particular, the paper aims to explore and
as discuss current and future research agenda issues. In particular, the paper aims to explore and proﬁle the nature and dynamics of the Quadruple/Quintuple Helix Innovation System Framework as an enabler and enactor of regional co-opetitive entrepre- neurial ecosystems which we conceptualize as fractal,multi-level, multi-modal, multi-nodal, and multi- lateral conﬁgurations of dynamic tangible and intangi- ble assets within the resource-based view and the newtheory of the growth of the ﬁrm. In this context, co- opetitive and fractal innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystems are deﬁned and discussed, and examplesof regional innovation policies, programs, and proj- ects are presented. Furthermore, the concept of Figure 1. The Quadruple/Quintuple Helix Innovation System Framework – an CS2FIE2 perspective. Source: Adapted from Carayannis and Campbell (2010).The ecosystem as helix R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 149 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
multilevel innovation systems is analyzed, taking into account the existence of knowledge clusters and inno-vation networks. Moreover, alternative aggregationsof multi-level innovation systems are proposed basedon their spatial (geographical) and non-spatial(research-based) functional properties. The Triple Helix model of knowledge production, developed by Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff (2000),stresses three ‘helices’ that intertwine and, by this,generate an innovation system: academia/universities,industry, and state government. They are inclined tospeak of ‘university-industry-government relations’and networks, also placing a particular emphasis on‘tri-lateral networks and hybrid organizations’ wherethose helices overlap. The Triple Helix may beregarded as a ‘core model’ for innovation, resultingfrom interactions in knowledge production referringto universities (higher education), industries (econ-omy), and governments (multilevel). The Triple Helixis being contextualized by the broader innovationmodel of the Quadruple Helix (government, univer-sity, industry, civil society), which is blending in fea-tures of the public, for example, civil society and themedia-based and culture-based public (Carayannisand Campbell, 2011). Moreover, the components of the Triple Helix sys- tem are the institutional spheres of university, indus-try, and government where the actors encompassed bythese spheres are differentiated as follows (Carayan-nis and Rakhmatullin, 2014) R&D performers that can be found in university, which is a universal knowledge-producing and dis-seminating institution that encompasses both thearts and the sciences, and occasionally integratesand cross-fertilizes these apparently divergentmodalities in interdisciplinary units. Non-R&D actors, such as those intervening in the context of design, production marketing, sales,technology adoption, incremental change, combin-ing existing knowledge in new ways, interactionwith users, acquisition of patents and licenses etc.
existing knowledge in new ways, interactionwith users, acquisition of patents and licenses etc. Hybrid institutions synthesizing elements of aca- demia, industry and government institutionaldesign and/or support, which can be both R&Dand non-R&D performers. Regarding the relationships Carayannis and Rakh- matullin (2014) distinguish between two main typesof relationships as the social evolutionary mecha-nisms inducing change in Triple Helix systems: • Collaboration and conﬂict moderation including provision of R&D and consultancy services,competence-building, formation of new marketsor consolidation of existing ones, creating andchanging organizations and/or institutions, net- working, technology transfer or acquisition ofgoods and services through market or nonmarketinteractions, incubation activities, ﬁnancing,negotiation etc. • Substitution, where such relationships arise when, in addition to fulﬁlling their traditionalfunctions, each institutional sphere may also‘take the role of the other’ by ﬁlling gaps thatemerge when another sphere is weak, or unableor unwilling to enact its traditional role. In extension of the Triple Helix model, Carayannis and Campbell (2009) suggest a ‘Quadruple HelixInnovation System Framework’. Quadruple Helix, inthis context, means to add to the above stated helicesa ‘fourth helix’ that they identify as the ‘media-basedand culture-based public’. This fourth helix associates with ‘media’, ‘creative industries’, ‘culture’, ‘values’, ‘life styles’, ‘art’, and perhaps also the notion of the‘creative class’ (a term, coined by Florida, 2004). Thisshould emphasize that a broader understanding ofknowledge production and innovation applicationrequires that also the public becomes more integratedinto advanced innovation systems (Carayannis andCampbell, 2011). Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework places a stronger focus on cooperation in innovationand, in particular, the dynamically intertwined proc-esses of co-opetition, co-evolution,
innovationand, in particular, the dynamically intertwined proc-esses of co-opetition, co-evolution, and co-specialization within and across regional and sectoralinnovation ecosystems (Carayannis, 2008; Carayannisand Campbell, 2009, 2012) that could serve as thefoundation for diverse smart specialization strategies (and introduce a move towards systemic and user- centric innovation structures). This Quadruple Helix Innovation System Frame- work puts innovation users at its heart and encouragesthe development of innovations that are pertinent forusers (civil society). Users or citizens here own anddrive the innovation processes. Arnkil et al. (2010) maintain that the degree of user involvement could be deﬁned as inclusive of the ‘design by users’. In linewith this perspective, new innovative products, serv-ices and solutions are developed with the involvementof users in their role as lead users, co-developers, andco-creators. Furthermore, the Triple Helix concept refers to the ideas of ‘Mode 1’ and ‘Mode 2’ knowledge produc- tion. The ‘Mode 1’ approach is the model ofuniversity-based knowledge production, compatiblewith the linear model of innovation, whereas the‘Mode 2’ model, which emphasizes a knowledgeapplication and a knowledge-based problem-solving,appears to be also compatible with non-linearElias G. Carayannis, Evangelos Grigoroudis, David F. J. Campbell, Dirk Meissner and Dimitra Stamati 150 R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
innovation (Carayannis et al., 2017a). The enhanced model proposed by Carayannis and Campbell (2009) is called ‘Mode 3’ and incorporates the fourth actor, civil society, to form a Quadruple Helix InnovationSystem Framework. ‘Mode 3’ allows and emphasizes the co-existence and co-evolution of different knowl- edge and innovation paradigms. Moreover, the ‘Mode3’ Knowledge Production System is at the heart of the Fractal Research, Education and Innovation Ecosys- tem (FREIE). FREIE represents another conceptualview necessary to comprehend and manage the ‘Mode 3’ model as well as the Quadruple/Quintuple Innovation Helices. The ‘Mode 3’ model or Knowl-edge Production System, expands and extends the‘Mode 1’ and ‘Mode 2’ Knowledge Production Sys- tem architectures to propose and proﬁle the architec- ture of a helically conceptualized, dynamic, complex,and non-linear knowledge creation, diffusion, and use system endowed with higher-order learning (learning, learning-to-learn, and learning-to-learn-how-to-learn)capabilities that is well-aligned and supportive of the ‘Ecosystem as Helix’ perspective of regional co- opetitive ecosystems or CS2FIE2. The paper is organized in four more sections. The theoretical background of co-opetitive knowledge and its linkages with the Quadruple/Quintuple Helix Inno-vation System Framework is given in Section 2, including a detailed discussion about ‘Mode 3’ Knowledge Production System. Section 3 discusseshow the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Frame- work may be applied in regional innovation initia- tives. Section 4 presents a contextualization ofregional innovation systems within multi-level sys-tems of Quadruple Helix Innovation Systems and pro- poses spatial and non-spatial framings. Finally, Section 5 summarizes some concluding remarks. 2. Co-opetive knowledge and quadruple helix innovation system framework ‘Mode 1’ of knowledge production refers primarily to basic university research (basic research performed by the higher education --- community (Lambert, 2003; Sainsbury Report, 2007; Wilson, 2012). However, Carayannis et al. (2017a) support that there is a new type of entrepreneurial university that has emerged, the ‘Mode 3’ university. The authors give the deﬁnition of this university as follows: A ‘Mode 3’ university, higher educational institute or higher educational system repre- sents a type of organization capable of higher order learning and in this regard, a type ofopen, highly complex and non-linear knowl- edge production system that seeks and realizes creative ways of combining, recombining and integrating different principles of knowledge production and knowledge application. Moreover, ‘Mode 3’ universities cross-reference their knowledge production and application also with ﬁrms (see Figure 2). The role of universities in regional economic devel- opment is frequent examined under the University Technology Transfer (UTT) concept, taking into account the increasingly complex network of regionalstakeholders. As emphasized by Miller et al. (2016),there is a need for more open and co-creational UTT, involving societal based innovation user stakeholders. Such an approach leads to a complex network of Quadruple Helix stakeholders involved at various stages throughout the UTT process. In order to exam- ine the dynamic and evolving nature of UTT, the authors emphasize the shift from a Triple into a Quad- ruple Helix Innovation System Framework. In addition, the ‘Mode 3’ model is related with an emerging fractal knowledge and innovation ecosys- tem, well conﬁgured for the knowledge economy (Carayannis and Campbell, 2009, p. 229). The authors emphasized the dynamically co-evolving, co-special- izing, and co-opetiting diverse and heterogeneous conﬁgurations of knowledge creation, diffusion, and use. The concept of fractal innovation ecosystems has been further elaborated and elucidated in the context of education, research, and innovation: the concept of the FREIE (Carayannis and Campbell, 2011).
refers primarily to basic university research (basic research performed by the higher education sector) that is being organized in a disciplinary structure, and it is compatible withthe linear model of innovation, while ‘Mode 2’ focuses on knowledge application and a knowledge- based problem-solving that involves the followingprinciples: ‘knowledge produced in the context of application’; ‘trans-disciplinarity’; ‘heterogeneity and organizational diversity’; ‘social accountability andreﬂexivity’; and ‘quality control’ (Carayannis and Campbell, 2012). The Triple Helix innovation con- cept refers to the ideas of ‘Mode1’ and ‘Mode 2’knowledge production.The ‘Mode 3’ Knowledge Production System approach, proposed by Carayannis and Campbell (2009), consists of ‘Innovation Networks’ and ‘Knowledge Clusters’ for knowledge creation, diffu- sion, and use, expanding the concepts of ‘Mode 1’ and ‘Mode 2’ knowledge production systems. The ‘Mode 3’ is a multi-layered, multi-modal, multi- nodal, and multi-lateral system, encompassing mutu-ally complementary and reinforcing innovation net- works and knowledge clusters consisting of human and intellectual capital, shaped by social capital and underpinned by ﬁnancial capital. ‘Mode 3’, in combination with the broadened per- spective of the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework, emphasizes an innovation ecosystem that encourages the co-evolution of different knowledge and innovation modes, as well as balances non-linear innovation modes in the context of multi-level inno- vation systems (Carayannis and Campbell, 2009).Mercan and G €oktas¸ (2011) provide a deﬁnition about innovation ecosystems that is closely related to the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework: an innovation ecosystem consists of economic agents and economic relations as well as the non-economic parts such as technology, insti- tutions, sociological interactions, and the culture. As noted by Durst and Poutanen (2013), such an approach suggests that an
and the culture. As noted by Durst and Poutanen (2013), such an approach suggests that an innovation ecosystem is a hybrid of different networks or systems. Interaction between individuals or other entities (groups, organizations) plays a critical role in articu- lating and amplifying knowledge (Nonaka, 1995). In the classical literature of co-opetition and evolution- ary theories of the ﬁrms, the ﬁrm can be considered as a repository of knowledge (Nelson and Winter, 1982).The origin of the knowledge-based view of a ﬁrm is in the strategic management literature and resource- based view (Penrose, 1959) later expanded by others (Barney, 1991). Universities can also play a signiﬁcant role to the ‘co-opetitive’ knowledge creation, diffusion, and use. The traditional university business model was implicit in nature, comprising of a wide range of activities to achieve the core mission of teaching, research, and dissemination of knowledge into society (Gibb, 2010). Etzkowitz et al. (2000) note that the transition-ing university business model takes on a more ‘entre- preneurial role’. The resultant evolving university business model is, therefore, dependent upon multiple stakeholder relationships because the new remit is reliant upon the transference of knowledge and skills between universities, business and the widerThe ecosystem as helix R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 151 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
of education, research, and innovation: the concept of the FREIE (Carayannis and Campbell, 2011). FREIE is a multilayered, multimodal, multi-nodal, and multi- lateral system encompassing mutually complemen- tary and reinforcing innovation networks and knowledge clusters consisting of human and intellec-tual capital, shaped by social capital and underpinned Figure 2. ‘Mode 3’ universities in co-opetitive entrepreneurial ecosystems. Source: Carayannis et al. (2017a).Elias G. Carayannis, Evangelos Grigoroudis, David F. J. Campbell, Dirk Meissner and Dimitra Stamati 152 R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License --- Japan. In: Carayannis, E.G. and Campbell, D.F.J. (eds), Knowledge Creation, Diffusion and Use in InnovationNetworks and Knowledge Clusters . Westport, CT: Praeger. pp. 67–100. Carayannis, E.G. (2008) Knowledge-driven creative destruction, or leveraging knowledge for competitiveadvantage: strategic knowledge arbitrage and serendipity as real options drivers triggered by co-opetition, co-evo- lution and co-specialization. Journal of Industry and Higher Education ,22, 343–353. Carayannis, E.G. and Campbell, D.F.J. (2009) “Mode 3” and “Quadruple Helix”: toward a 21st century fractalinnovation ecosystem. International Journal of Technol- ogy Management ,46, 201–234. Carayannis, E.G. and Campbell, D.F.J. (2011) Open inno- vation diplomacy and a 21st century Fractal Research,Education and Innovation (FREIE) ecosystem: buildingon the Quadruple and Quintuple Helix Innovation con-cepts and the “Mode 3” Knowledge Production System.Journal of the Knowledge Economy ,2, 327–372. Carayannis, E.G. and Campbell, D.F.J. (2012) Mode 3 Knowledge Production in Quadruple Helix InnovationSystems: 21st Century Democracy, Innovation, andEntrepreneurship for Development . New York, NY: Springer Briefs in Business, Springer. Carayannis, E.G., Campbell, D.F.J., and Rehman, S.S. (2016a) Mode 3 knowledge production: systems and sys-tems theory, clusters and networks. Journal of Innova- tion and Entrepreneurship ,5, 1–24. Carayannis, E.G., Campbell, D.F.J., Grigoroudis, E., Meissner, D., and Stamati, D. (2017a) “Mode 3” univer- sities and academic ﬁrms: thinking beyond the box trans- disciplinarity and non-linear innovation dynamics withinco-opetitive entrepreneurial ecosystems. International Jour- nal of Technology Management . Available at: http://www. inderscience.com/info/ingeneral/forthcoming.php?jcode= ijtm Carayannis, E.G., Goletsis, Y., and Grigoroudis, E. (2017b) Composite innovation metrics: MCDA and the quadrupleinnovation helix framework. Technological Forecasting and Social Change .
by ﬁnancial capital. ‘Mode 3’ allows and emphasizes the co-existence and coevolution of different knowl-edge and innovation paradigms, while in combinationwith the broadened perspective of the QuadrupleHelix Innovation System Framework emphasizes aninnovation ecosystem that encourages the co-evolution of different knowledge and innovationmodes, as well as balances non-linear innovationmodes in the context of multi-level innovation sys-tems (Carayannis and Campbell, 2009). Concluding, the ‘Mode 3’ and the Quadruple/Quin- tuple Innovation Helix Innovation System Frameworkcould serve as the foundation for diverse smart spe-cialization strategies as they place a stronger focus oncooperation in innovation, and in particular, thedynamically intertwined processes of co-opetition,coevolution, and co-specialization (further discussionabout the concepts of co-opetitive knowledge may befound in Brandenburger and Nalebuff, 1997). Byapplying a Quadruple/Quintuple Helix InnovationSystem Framework, regional policymakers are morelikely to enable a locus-centric and triple-bottom-line-centric entrepreneurial process of discovery followedby intensive experimentation as well as DEED lead-ing to high quantity and quality of sustainable as wellsocial innovation. 3. Quadruple helix innovation system framework in regional innovation 3.1. Developing Quadruple Helix-based regional policy initiatives The Europe 2020 strategy is a comprehensive eco- nomic policy agenda focusing on three priorities:smart, sustainable, and inclusive growth. The smartspecialization strategy adopted by the EU aims toexploit the socio-economic assets of a region, which can be developed and exploited worldwide in order to rapidly disseminate knowledge (Edwards et al.,2015). This is also referred as Research and Innova-tion Strategy for Smart Specialization (RIS3). Theprinciple of smart specialization requires regions tobuild on its own strengths and manage a priority-setting process in the context of national and
tobuild on its own strengths and manage a priority-setting process in the context of national and regionalinnovation strategies (European Commission, 2012). However, as emphasized by Edwards et al. (2015), additional work is still needed in order to achieve a common understanding of the notion of entrepreneur- ial discovery, and most important, on how to effec-tively operationalize it in the context of national andregional development policy and in a way that allowsfor lessons to be learnt and good practices to be trans-ferred across borders. In addition, during RIS3implementation, the activities, results, and policy out- put should be monitored with continuity in order tohave an effective feedback in the strategy revisionprocess. As a result, RIS3 may continuously adjustand adapt to changing conditions in the socio-economic context. One version of the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework was recently endorsed by theEuropean Commission in its ‘RIS3 Guide’. TheQuadruple Helix Innovation System Framework thuscan serve as an architectural innovation blueprint thatengages simultaneously four sectoral perspectives.The inter-sectoral and intra-sectoral, as well as theinter-regional and intra-regional knowledge andlearning interfaces that are embedded in the Quadru-ple Helix architectural blueprint determine its efﬁcacyand sustainability. A combination of these four per-spectives aims for the conceptualization, contextuali-zation, design, implementation, and evolution of(smart, sustainable, and inclusive) growth-drivingentrepreneurship and innovation ecosystems (as wellas clusters, networks, and other agglomerations) at theregional level (Carayannis and Rakhmatullin, 2014). The identiﬁcation and the roles of the innovation actors in a regional innovation system have beenextensively studied in the literature. The main aim ofthese studies is to examine the factors that contributeto a successful development of a regional innovationsystem, within a Quadruple Helix
that contributeto a successful development of a regional innovationsystem, within a Quadruple Helix Innovation SystemFramework. For example, Lew et al. (2016) examineinternational connections in order to explain thedynamics of the Trentino regional innovation sys-tems. Their ﬁndings justify the evolving role of theTriple Helix model and a shift toward the QuadrupleHelix Innovation System Framework. Civil society as the fourth pillar of the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework representsbottom-up actions and views of the civil society.However, to beneﬁt from these, policymakers shouldensure mechanisms such as crowd-sourcing andcrowd-funding capabilities in instruments and initia-tives. Embedding these elements may allow for faster,broader, cheaper, and more resilient learning,learning-to learn, and learning-to learn-how-to-learndynamics. In addition, the social networking capabil-ities enacted via the fourth pillar would enhance thelikelihood and impact of knowledge serendipity andknowledge arbitrage events (happy accidents). Thesehappy accidents would then act as triggers, catalysts,and accelerators of exploration and exploitationdynamics that could substantially empower anyQuadruple Helix strategy. Carayannis and Rakhmatullin (2014) present some characteristic examples of excellence from the NordicThe ecosystem as helix R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 153 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
countries regarding the adoption of the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework: (1) The Start-Up Sauna: It is a business accelera- tor (still run by young enthusiasts but nowfunded by government, business, and aca-demia) that occupies a dilapidated warehouse next to the Aalto University. (2) Linas Matkasse: It is a company co-founded by Niklas Aronsson that applies the IKEA’sdo-it-yourself model to family dinners. Thecompany delivers bags containing all theingredients needed for a meal, chopped upand ready to cook. This example demonstrates that many of the region’s most interesting entrepreneurs operate at the low end of thetech spectrum. (3) Asunto Oy Helsingin Loppukiri: It is a Fin- nish private housing association that has builta housing community in the suburbs of Hel-sinki. The idea is to reinvent retirement homes for baby-boomers. (4) Rovio Entertainment: It is known for Angry Birds, a game that involves catapulting irasci-ble avians at elaborate fortresses constructedby evil pigs. Carayannis and Rakhmatullin ( 2014) support that successful research and innovation strategies cannot beeffectively formulated and implemented without put-ting in place a functioning multi-level governancestructure. As noted by Carayannis (2008), at the heartof the design, implementation and leveraging of such initiatives are strategic knowledge arbitrage and seren- dipity (SKARSE). The term strategic knowledge seren-dipity refers to the unintended beneﬁts of enablingknowledge to ‘spill over’ between employees, groups,and functional domains (‘happy accidents’ in learning),while strategic knowledge arbitrage represents thecapacity to create, identify, reallocate, and recombineknowledge assets better and/or faster (see Figure 3). Considering the different levels of clusters, two major perspectives appear. From an actor perspectiveit becomes obvious that regional strategies based onthe Triple Helix model in open regional innovationsystems are required. From the systems
based onthe Triple Helix model in open regional innovationsystems are required. From the systems perspective, itshows that coherence at higher (international/global) level to use dynamic economies of scale is essential, therefore multi-level governance is needed, for exam-ple, strategic convergence between actors at differentpolicy levels has to be fostered. In conclusion, itseems that smart specialization is a strategy that canhelp any region move forward to innovation and if itis used through the right elements such as clusters, itcan become one powerful tool within the context of the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework. 3.2. Co-creation of regional innovation business models within a ‘Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework’ The Living Lab is an approach that gained attention among several scholars in which all four important Figure 3. Strategic knowledge, serendipity, and arbitrage (SKARSETM) in action. [Colour ﬁgure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com] Source: Carayannis (2008).Elias G. Carayannis, Evangelos Grigoroudis, David F. J. Campbell, Dirk Meissner and Dimitra Stamati 154 R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
actor groups of the Quadruple Helix Innovation Sys- tem Framework are actively present. Several charac- teristic examples of the Living Lab approach may be found in the literature. Laurea is a R&D oriented university of applied sci- ences, which operates in the Helsinki metropolitan area and it is focused on service innovations. As notedby Hirvikoski (2016), Laurea’s strategic choice is to integrate three tasks: education, R&D, and regional development. The R&D activities are focused on wel-fare, knowledge intensive business services, and social responsibility. In this context, the Learning by Developing (LbD) model has been developed as atool for reaching its strategic goals and implementing them in practice. Through its several locations and its LbD-based innovation process Laurea acts both as ahost organization for a few Living Labs, and as an innovation service provider in Living Lab context. The Alcotra Innovation Strategic Project is another interesting example, funded under the Alcotra Pro-gramme. The program pursued two major objectives (Alcotra Innovation, 2013): establish cross-border Living Labs as a way for improving the competitive-ness and innovation capacities of the territories and sensitize policy makers to the Living Lab approach. In a ﬁrst phase of the project, each region organizedlocal workshops with the purpose of raising awareness of the Quadruple Helix stakeholders and the cross- border Living Lab’s idea. New patterns of territorial(smart) specialization have been identiﬁed with the support of the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework (see Figure 4 for the project’s BusinessModel Canvas). Another interesting project is the Arctic smart city Living Lab, aiming to build an operational model as apromoting (dynamic, strategic, and transformative) process meant for the public city organization (Iivari, 2016). The entire city functions as a Living Lab scenewith the principles of anticipatory, future-oriented action learning. Thus, the
a Living Lab scenewith the principles of anticipatory, future-oriented action learning. Thus, the operational model can be seen as a business model for the city (see more detailsin Iivari, 2016). The Quadruple/Quintuple Helix Innovation System Frameworks have been applied in several empiricalstudies in order to better understand the examined innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystems: the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Frameworkemphasizes the importance of civil society (Kahn,2016) or of political structures (Kimatu, 2016), while the Quintuple Helix Innovation System Framework focuses more on the environment and sustainability(Rosenlund et al., 2015, 2017). Although several stud- ies have examined the Quadruple/Quintuple Helix Innovation System Framework, all these researchefforts are basically empirical works that examinespeciﬁc (and limited) aspects of these approaches. For example, Carayannis et al. (2017b) revisit the nationaland regional Innovation Scoreboards by consideringthe different preferences of innovation stakeholders under the Quadruple Helix Innovation System Frame- work. They emphasize that such an approach givesthe ability to develop policies and practices orientedtoward speciﬁc Quadruple Helix actors. In a differentcontext, Carayannis et al. (2016b) present an inte-grated assessment and classiﬁcation framework fornational and regional innovation efﬁciency. Follow- ing Schumpeter’s (1934) deﬁnition for innovation, the proposed multistage approach considers the differentstages of knowledge production and commercializa-tion, while the coexistence and coevolution ofnational and regional innovation systems are modeledthrough a multilevel approach. Efﬁciency results areexamined under the Quadruple Helix Innovation Sys- tem Framework in order to examine how factors related to the Quadruple Helix actors affect the esti-mated national/regional performance. As noted byCarayannis et al. (2016b), such an approach may pro-vide a valuable tool for
As noted byCarayannis et al. (2016b), such an approach may pro-vide a valuable tool for country/region comparisonand policy formulation, while giving insight in under-standing the nature and dynamics of innovation pro- cess at its different stages and levels. 4. Multi-level innovation systems and Quadruple Helix Innovation SystemFramework 4.1. Contextualization of regional innovation systems It is interesting to note that a ‘region’ is not necessar- ily a standardized term or concept. ‘Regional’ orregion can have at least two meanings: (1) Regional may refer to (sub-national) local units or entities. This represents a typicalapproach within European Union (EU) lan-guage, where a region may also cut acrossnation-state (EU member state) borders. (2) But regional can also address clusters or agglomerations of different nation states (i.e.,the Region of Latin America) (see, e.g.,Peters, 1998). It is reasonable to argue that an analysis, based on the concept of regional innovation systems, shouldactually be framed conceptually wider and broaderwithin the context of ‘multi-level innovation sys-tems’. Multi-level governance ‘de-nationalizes’ our view and assessment of processes. By this, the logical departure for regional innovation systems are not theThe ecosystem as helix R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 155 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
regions, but the more-wider understood ‘multi-level’ architectures in innovation. ‘Multi-level systems’ requires a need for deﬁning, what a system is andwhat possible characteristics of ‘multi-level’ are. Bengt-A ˚ke Lundvall paraphrased Boulding (1985) by saying that a system could be seen as the opposite to chaos. In more detail, Lundvall (1992, p. 2) mentions: Somewhat more speciﬁcally, a system is con- stituted by a number of elements and by the relationships between these elements. In the words of Kuhlmann (2001, p. 955), a system is:As a system we understand a conglomeration of actors, institutions and processes all func- tionally bound together, whereby certain char-acteristic core functions of each form thedemarcation criteria against other societal(sub)systems. In the process of a deﬁnition of a system, often two aspects are coming together: the elements of a system,and the self-rational of a system. With the logic of thisparticular approach, the following deﬁnition can beoffered for a system (Campbell, 2001, p. 426;Carayannis et al., 2016a, p. 4): Figure 4. Business model canvas of Alcotra Innovation project. Source: Alcotra Innovation (2013).Elias G. Carayannis, Evangelos Grigoroudis, David F. J. Campbell, Dirk Meissner and Dimitra Stamati 156 R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
(1) Elements: systems consist of elements (parts); (2) Self-rationale: systems have a mode of opera- tion, a self-rationale (logic, self-logic), which organizes the self-organization and reproduc-tion of a system and the relationship betweenthe elements within a system and, further-more, the relationship between the system andthe other systems. In innovation theory, networks and clusters are important. ‘Innovation networks’ and ‘knowledgeclusters’ introduce new perspectives. Networksunderscore the importance of boundary-transcendinginterlinkages in inter-disciplinary, trans-disciplinary,and trans-sectoral formats. The concept of sectoralsystems of innovation (Malerba, 2002, 2004) alsorelates to ideas of clusters and networks. Smart citiesor knowledge cities represent another example for knowledge clusters. This puts forward the demand and requirement to conceptually bride networks andclusters with systems (and systems theory), leading tosomething like networks of innovation networks andknowledge clusters. If a system is embedded by alarger system, then this system qualiﬁes to be inter-preted as a cluster or an element of a larger meta-system. Furthermore, elements or clusters within asystem could be tested if they also qualify to be con- sidered being a subsystem (or micro-system). This clearly expresses fractal characteristics in structureand process (see Figure 5). As K €ubler (2015) elaborates, multi-level architec- tures or multi-level governance in the EU is beingdriven by three main trends, occurring and interactingin interwoven formats at the same time. For K €ubler, multi-level governance is closely associated with de- nationalization, strengthening the supranational level,but also the regions (regional clusters) and civil society. The Triple Helix innovation model focuses clearly on the university–industry–government relations(Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff, 2000). In this regard, theTriple Helix represents a basic model for knowledge production and innovation
In this regard, theTriple Helix represents a basic model for knowledge production and innovation application (in the knowl- edge economy). Contrary to this, the Quadruple/Quin-tuple Helix Innovation System Frameworks are set upin a way to comprehend the complexity in knowledgeproduction and knowledge application. Therefore, theanalytical architectures of Quadruple Helix and Quin-tuple Helix are conceptually broader. The conceptual building blocks of the Quadruple/ Quintuple Helix Innovation System Framework allowto enrich and to augment the designs and architecturesof multi-level innovation systems in multi-facettedways, in order to additionally contextualize the under-standings and the meanings of regional innovationsystems adequately. 4.2. Spatial and non-spatial framings and implications In a spatial context, the multi-level system approach can address different layers, such as global, suprana- tional, national, regional, and local. The national sys- tem of innovation represents here one of the coreunderstandings. Lundvall (1992, p. 2) deﬁnes thenational innovation system in the following way: It follows that a system of innovation is con- stituted by elements and relationships whichinteract in the production, diffusion and use ofnew, and economically useful, knowledge and that a national system encompasses elements and relationships, either located within orrooted inside the borders of a nation state ... it is obvious that the national system of inno- vation is a social system. A central activity inthe system of innovation is learning, andlearning is a social activity, which involves interaction between people. In this regard, Lundvall (1992, p. 4) depicted the modern Western nation states as ‘engines of growth’.But despite this focus on the national level, Lundvall was from the beginning explicit, by acknowledging the global, but also the regional levels and dimensionsof innovation. Both globalisation and regionalisation might be interpreted as processes which
innovation. Both globalisation and regionalisation might be interpreted as processes which weaken the Figure 5. A formalized deﬁnition of systems, knowledge clus- ters, and innovation networks.Source: Authors’ own conceptualization (adapted Carayannis et al., 2016a, p. 9).The ecosystem as helix R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 157 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
coherence and importance of national sys- tems. (Lundvall, 1992, p. 3) So, by this, it could be argued that Lundvall framed his ideas of a national innovation system already fromthe beginning within the context of multi-level archi- tectures, meaning it does not make sense to talk about a national level without acknowledging global and(subnational) regional and local levels. Therefore, when Lundvall asserts that a concept of a national innovation system is meaninglesswithout the (multi-level) in-parallel identiﬁcationof the global and regional levels, the same also applies to the perspective and point-of-departure from the regional level: reference to and use of theconcept of regional innovation systems requiresthat these regional systems must be contextualized within the framework of multi-level innovation systems. Regional innovation systems are being set up on a more sustainable basis and are being enhanced by making them broader and by incorporating considera-tions and elements of the Quadruple/Quintuple HelixInnovation System Framework. This already has been veriﬁed in several recent ﬁeld studies, focusing often on case studies from the Scandinavian or Nordic coun-tries (see Grundel and Dahlstr €om, 2016; Kolehmainen et al., 2016). The idea of a spatial (regional or national) inno- vation and entrepreneurial ecosystem also assumesa co-evolution of different subsystems, for example the innovation system and the entrepreneurial system:The spatial (regional or national) innovation and entrepreneurial ecosystem is an opencomplex dynamic system with a framework,where a speciﬁc institutional environment ofan innovative type is formed, and which takes into account the national (regional) economic interests and contributes to the activation andenhancement of innovations, technologiesand human capital. (Dubina et al., 2017,p. 438) In empirical terms, a spatial innovation and entre- preneurial ecosystem was discussed and applied for aRussian case study. Despite those
and entre- preneurial ecosystem was discussed and applied for aRussian case study. Despite those spatial examples of multi-level inno- vation systems, also a non-spatial further elaborationof multi-level innovation systems is possible. The spa-tial approach suggests different forms and ways of aspatial (geographical) aggregation of a multi-level innovation system. But this is not the only option for an aggregation. Aggregation may also mean to iden-tify different functional systems or sub-systems, andthen to consider, which of these are more focused orbroader in their analytical range and ramiﬁcations. In that sense, we could work along the ‘research axis’ or ‘research branch’ of a multi-level innovation system,by starting with the research system. In Figure 6, a two-dimensional aggregation of multi-level innovation systems is proposed. The spa-tial (geographical) axis is being compared with a non-spatial (research-based) functional axis. ‘Emphasizing the ‘research axis’ of knowledge, we can apply more speciﬁcally the multi-level logic by referring to multi- Figure 6. Multi-level systems of innovation: functional (non-spatial) and geographical (spatial) aggregation. Source: Adapted from Carayannis et al. (2016a, p. 12).Elias G. Carayannis, Evangelos Grigoroudis, David F. J. Campbell, Dirk Meissner and Dimitra Stamati 158 R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License --- level systems of innovation and want to propose two particular directions of further aggregation’ (Camp-bell, 2006). Functionally, the aggregation may move from R&D to S&T and ﬁnally to innovation; and geographically, the aggregation may take thedirection from subnational (local) to nationaland transnational (supranational, global).(Carayannis et al., 2016a, p. 11) This two-dimensional exercise in Figure 6 could of course be extended (and diversiﬁed) also to an n-dimensional aggregation of multi-level innovationsystems. 5. Concluding remarks In this paper, we aim to explore the validity of view-ing an ecosystem as a helix. Speciﬁcally, we aim toexplore the extent and validity between an ecosystemand the Quadruple/Quintuple Helix Innovation Sys-tem Framework. In this manner, we aim to provide a theoretical framework for the study and design of regional and sectoral co-opetitive innovation ecosys-tems embedded within a Quadruple/Quintuple Helixcontext. In this context, we have proposed and pro-ﬁled the introduction and use of the Quadruple/Quin-tuple Innovation Helix System Framework as anenabler and enactor of innovation and entrepreneur-ship ecosystems in general and Regional/Sectoral Co-opetitive Ecosystems in particular to model, explicate, and predict the nature and dynamics of the role and behavior of the constituent elements of said ecosys-tems, namely government, university, industry, andcivil society entities operating within a triple bottomline (social, ﬁnancial, and environmental excellence)mandate. Our research to date has revealed the potential and promise of such an approach as a facilitator and ena- bler of more effective and efﬁcient socio-economic,socio-political, and socio-technical dynamic and com-plex conﬁgurations of tangible and intangible resour-ces with an entrepreneurial and innovativepredilection and propensity. In particular, we highlighted and showcased this in our paper via regional business model innovation cases-in-point and we
and showcased this in our paper via regional business model innovation cases-in-point and we demonstrated the value ofdeveloping the concept of Co-opetitive Spatial andSectoral Fractal Innovation and Entrepreneurial Eco-systems (CS2FIE2). We aim to continue our concep-tual and empirical, qualitative, and quantitativeresearch to further highlight the challenges andopportunities intrinsic in the development, explora- tion, exploitation, and deployment of highly efﬁca- cious entrepreneurial ecosystems. Our focus will remain on the research and develop- ment of more powerful and representative metrics and measurements as proxies of the anatomy and function- ality of said ecosystems as well as the identiﬁcation, parameterization, and calibration of qualitative as wellas quantitative representations across time and space of the performance of ecosystems as Quadruple/Quintuple Helices. In so doing, we aim to overcome current limi-tations regarding validity, reliability, and generalizabil- ity that emanate from current region-constrained and case-speciﬁc metrics and measurements. Acknowledgements The article was partially prepared within the frame- work of the Basic Research Program at the National Research University Higher School of Economics (HSE) and partially supported within the framework of the subsidy granted to the HSE by the Governmentof the Russian Federation for the implementation of the Global Competitiveness Program. References Alcotra Innovation (2013) Alcotra Innovation Experience Handbook: how to set up cross-border Living Labs. Available at: http://www.alcotra-innovation.eu/living- Labs/dwd/Alcotra_Innovazione_ Handbook_2013.pdf Arnkil, R., J €arvensivu, A., Koski, P., and Piirainen, T. (2010) Exploring Quadruple Helix: outlining user-oriented innovation models, Final Report on Quadruple Helix Research for the CLIQ project, Working Paper 85/ 2010. University of Tampere, Tampere. Available
Research for the CLIQ project, Working Paper 85/ 2010. University of Tampere, Tampere. Available at:https://tampub.uta.ﬁ/bitstream/handle/10024/65758/978-951-44-8209-0.pdf?sequence 51 Barney, J.B. (1991) Firm resources and sustained competi- tive advantage. Journal of Management ,17, 99–120. Boulding, K.E. (1985) The World as a Total System .B e v - erly Hills, CA: Sage. Brandenburger, A. and Nalebuff, B.J. (1997) Co-Opetition . New York: Doubleday. Campbell, D.F.J. (2001) Politische Steuerung €uber €offentliche F €orderung universit €arer Forschung? System- theoretische €Uberlegungen zu Forschungs- und Techno- logiepolitik (Political steering through public support ofuniversity research? Systems-theoretical considerationsabout research and technology policy]. €Osterreichische Zeitschrift f €ur Politikwissenschaft (Austrian Journal of Political Science) ,30, 425–438. Campbell, D.F.J. (2006) The university/business research networks in science and technology: knowledge produc-tion trends in the United States, European Union andThe ecosystem as helix R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 159 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
MCDA and the quadrupleinnovation helix framework. Technological Forecasting and Social Change . Available at: http://www.sciencedirect. com/science/article/pii/S0040162517303232 Carayannis, E.G., Grigoroudis, E., and Goletsis, Y. (2016b) A multilevel and multistage efﬁciency evaluation ofinnovation systems: a multiobjective DEA approach.Expert Systems with Applications ,62,6 3 – 8 0 . Carayannis, E.G. and Rakhmatullin, R. (2014) The Quadru- ple/Quintuple Innovation Helixes and smart specialisa-tion strategies for sustainable and inclusive growth inEurope and beyond. Journal of the Knowledge Economy , 5, 212–239. Carayannis, E.G. and Campbell, D.F.J. (2010) Triple Helix, Quadruple Helix and Quintuple Helix and how doknowledge, innovation and the environment relate toeach other? A proposed framework for a trans-discipli-nary analysis of sustainable development and social ecology. International Journal of Social Ecology and Sustainable Development ,1,4 1 – 6 9 . Dubina, I.N., Campbell, D.F.J., Carayannis, E.G., Chub, A.A., Grigoroudis, E., and Kozhevina, O.V. (2017) Thebalanced development of the spatial innovation and entrepreneurial ecosystem based on principles of the sys- tems compromise: a conceptual framework. Journal of the Knowledge Economy ,8, 438–455. Durst, S. and Poutanen, P. (2013) Success factors of inno- vation ecosystems: a literature review. In: Smeds, R. and Irrmann, O. (eds), CO-CREATE 2013: The Boundary- Crossing Conference on CoDesign in Innovation . Espoo, Finland: Aalto University Publication series SCIEN- CE1TECHNOLOGY 15/2013. pp. 27–38. Edwards, J., Gianelle, C., Kyriakou, D., and Midtkandal, I. (2015) Smart specialisation for regional economic trans-formation. Asia-Paciﬁc Tech Monitor ,32, 13–18. Etzkowitz, H., Gulbrandsen, M., and Levitt, J. (2000) Pub- lic Venture Capital: Government Funding Sources forTechnology Entrepreneurs . New York: Harcourt-Brace. Etzkowitz, H. and Leydesdorff, L. (2000) The dynamics of innovation: from national
Harcourt-Brace. Etzkowitz, H. and Leydesdorff, L. (2000) The dynamics of innovation: from national systems and “Mode 2” to a Triple Helix of university-industry-government relations. Research Policy ,29, 109–123. European Commission. (2012) Guide to research report and innovation strategies for Smart Specialisations (RIS3), European Union, Luxembourg. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/docgener/presenta/smart_specialisation/smart_ris3_2012.pdf Florida, R. (2004) The Rise of the Creative Class and How It’s Transforming Work, Leisure, Community and Every- day Life . New York: Basic Books. Gibb, A. (2010) Towards the Entrepreneurial University: Entrepreneurship Education as a Lever for Change .B i r - mingham: The National Council for Graduate Entrepreneurship. Grundel, I. and Dahlstr €om, M. (2016) A Quadruple and Quintuple Helix approach to regional innovation systems in the transformation to a forestry-based bioeconomy. Journal of the Knowledge Economy ,7, 963–983. Hirvikoski, T. (2016) Laurea Living Labs network, Euro- pean Network of Living Labs (ENoLL). Available at: http://www.openlivinglabs.eu/sites/enoll.org/ﬁles/Laurea_ Living_Labs_Network_0.pdf Iivari, M. (2016) Exploring business models in ecosystemic contexts. Acta Universitatis Ouluensis , 84, University of Oulu. Available at: http://jultika.oulu.ﬁ/ﬁles/ isbn9789526212401.pdf Kahn, M. (2016) Mitigating South Africa’s HIV epidemic: the interplay of social entrepreneurship and the innova- tion system. Minerva ,54, 129–150. Kimatu, J.N. (2016) Evolution of strategic interactions from the triple to quad helix innovation models for sus-tainable development in the era of globalization. Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship ,5,1 – 7 . Kolehmainen, J., Irvine, J., Stewart, L., Karacsonyi, Z., Szab /C19o, T., Alarinta, J., and Norberg, A. (2016) Quadru- ple Helix, innovation and the knowledge-based develop- ment: lessons from remote, rural and less-favoured regions. Journal of the
knowledge-based develop- ment: lessons from remote, rural and less-favoured regions. Journal of the Knowledge Economy ,7, 23–42. Kuhlmann, S. (2001) Future governance of innovation pol- icy in Europe: three scenarios. Research Policy ,30, 953–976.Elias G. Carayannis, Evangelos Grigoroudis, David F. J. Campbell, Dirk Meissner and Dimitra Stamati 160 R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License --- Journal, Journal of Growth and Change, Review of Regional Studies among others. Evangelos Grigoroudis is Associate Professor on management of quality processes in the School of Production Engineering and Management of the Technical University of Crete, Greece (2002 2). He has received distinctions from the Hellenic Opera- tional Research Society, the Academy of Business and Administrative Sciences, the World Automation Congress, the Foundation of Ioannis and Vasileia Karayianni, the Technical University of Crete, and the State Scholarships Foundation of Greece. He acts as reviewer for more than 60 scientiﬁc journals, and he is associate editor and member of the Editorial Board of the several scientiﬁc journals. He is author/ editor of 17 books on the measurement of service quality, the business strategy and management, and the multicriteria decision aid approaches, as well as of a signiﬁcant number of research reports and papers in scientiﬁc journals and conference proceedings. David F. J. Campbell is a Research Fellow (Senior Scientist) at the Institute of Science Communication and Higher Education Research (WIHO), Faculty for Interdisciplinary Studies (iff), Alpen-Adria- University of Klagenfurt; Lecturer and ‘Privat- Dozent’ in Political Science at the University of Vienna; and a Quality Enhancement Expert and Quality Researcher at the University of Applied Arts in Vienna. He studied political science at the Univer- sity of Vienna. In 2014, Campbell received a ‘Habili- tation’ (Doctor Habilitatus) from the University of Vienna with a Venia Docendi for Comparative Politi- cal Science. His articles on knowledge, innovation,The ecosystem as helix R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 161 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley --- computing, and newtechnologies.Elias G. Carayannis, Evangelos Grigoroudis, David F. J. Campbell, Dirk Meissner and Dimitra Stamati 162 R&D Management 48, 1, 2018 VC2017 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd  14679310, 2018, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/radm.12300 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [09/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
K€ubler, D. (2015) De-nationalization and multi-level gov- ernance. In: Braun, D. and Maggetti, M. (eds), Compara- tive Politics: Theoretical and Methodological Challenges . Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. pp. 55–89. Lambert, R. (2003) Lambert review of business-university collaboration, London H.M. Treasury. Available at:http://www.eua.be/eua/jsp/en/upload/lambert_review_ﬁnal_ 450.1151581102387.pdf Lew, Y.K., Khan, Z., and Cozzio, S. (2016) Gravitating toward the quadruple helix: international connections for the enhancement of a regional innovation system in North- east Italy. R&D Management , doi: 10.1111/radm.12227 Lundvall, B.A. (1992) National Systems of Innovation: Towards a Theory of Innovation and Interactive Learn- ing. London: Pinter Publishers. Malerba, F. (2002) Sectoral systems of innovation and pro- duction. Research Policy ,31, 247–264. Malerba, F. (2004) Sectoral Systems of Innovation: con- cepts, Issues and Analyses of Six Major Sectors in Europe . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. M e r c a n ,B .a n dG €oktas¸, D. (2011) Components of innovation ecosystems: a cross-country study. International Research Journal of Finance and Economics ,76, 102–112. Miller, K., McAdam, R., and McAdam, M. (2016) A sys- tematic literature review of university technology trans- fer from a quadruple helix perspective: toward a research agenda. R&D Management , doi: 10.1111/ radm.12228 Nelson, R.R. and Winter, S.G. (1982) An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Nonaka, I. (1995) The Knowledge-Creating Company . New York: Oxford Press. Penrose, E.G. (1959) The Theory of the Growth of the Firm . New York: Wiley. Peters, B.G. (1998) Comparative Politics: Theory and Methods . London: Macmillan. Rosenlund, J., Hogland, W., Johansson, A.W., and Seddon, J. (2015) A cross-national environmental cluster collabo-ration: shifting between an analytical and management level of the triple helix. Science and Public Policy ,42, 583–593. --- an analytical and management level of the triple helix. Science and Public Policy ,42, 583–593. Rosenlund, J., Rosell, E., and Hogland, W. (2017) Over- coming the triple helix boundaries in an environmental research collaboration. Science and Public Policy ,44, 153–162. Sainsbury Report (2007) The race to the top: a review of government’s science and innovation policies, HMSO. Available at: http://www.rsc.org/images/sainsbury_ review051007_tcm18-103118.pdf Schumpeter, J.A. (1934) The Theory of Economic Develop- ment . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Wilson, T. (2012) A review of business-university collabo- ration, Higher Education Funding Council for England.Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/ system/uploads/attachment_ data/ﬁle/32383/12–610-wil- son-review-business-university-collaboration.pdf Elias G. Carayannis is Full Professor of Science, Technology, Innovation and Entrepreneurship, aswell as co-Founder and co-Director of the Global and Entrepreneurial Finance Research Institute (GEFRI) and Director of Research on Science, Technology, Innovation and Entrepreneurship, European Union Research Center, (EURC) at the School of Business of the George Washington University in Washington, DC. Dr Carayannis’ teaching and research activities focus on the areas of strategic Government- University-Industry R&D partnerships, technology road-mapping, technology transfer and commerciali- zation, international science and technology policy, technological entrepreneurship and regional eco- nomic development. Dr Carayannis has several publi-cations in both academic and practitioner journals, including IEEE Transactions in Engineering Man- agement, Research Policy, Journal of R&D Manage- ment, Journal of Engineering and Technology Management, International Journal of Technology Management, Technovation, Journal of Technology Transfer, Engineering Management Journal, Journal of Growth and Change, Review of Regional Studies among others. Evangelos
See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
knowledge economy and democracy (knowledge democracy and quality of democracy) have been published in several international journals. Campbell teaches (taught) at the University of Klagenfurt, Uni-versity of Vienna, University of Applied Arts Vienna and George Washington University in Washington D.C. (Elliott School of International Affairs). Dirk Meissner has 15 years of experience in research and teaching technology and innovation management and policy. Prior to joining the NationalResearch University-Higher School of Economics, he was responsible for technology and innovation policy at the presidential ofﬁce of the Swiss Scienceand Technology Council. He also has long experi- ence in top level consulting to key decision makers in industry, headed the business unit industry studiesand research with T.A. Cook Consultants which he successfully established and was management con- sultant for technology and innovation managementwith Arthur D. Little. He is and was member ofinternational working groups on technology and innovation policy. Dr Meissner represented Switzer- land and now the Russian Federation at the OECD Working Party on Technology and Innovation Policy.His research interests include new business develop- ment, competitive intelligence, innovation and tech- nology policy, innovation management audits,processes and organizational restructuring, R&D management, and R&D strategies. Dimitra Stamati is PhD candidate at the Technical University of Crete, School of Production Engineer- ing and Management. She received her B.S. and M.Sc. degree from the University of Piraeus, Depart-ment of Digital Systems (2014) and the Harokopion University of Athens in Advanced Information Sys- tems in Business (2016, respectively, and completedher internship at Altec Integration S.A. Her research interests include business process management, serv- ice oriented architecture, cloud computing, and newtechnologies.Elias G. Carayannis, Evangelos Grigoroudis, David F. J. Campbell,
El artículo titulado "The ecosystem as helix: an exploratory theory-building study of regional co-opetitive entrepreneurial ecosystems as Quadruple/Quintuple Helix Innovation Models" es una investigación colaborativa de académicos de diversas instituciones, cuyo objetivo principal es explorar y perfilar la naturaleza y dinámica de los modelos de innovación de Cuádruple y Quíntuple Hélice. Estos modelos integran los sectores gubernamental, universitario, industrial, de la sociedad civil y del medio ambiente, y son considerados esenciales para el desarrollo de ecosistemas emprendedores regionales que operan bajo un enfoque de co-opetencia, donde los actores persiguen objetivos que pueden ser tanto conflictivos como convergentes.

Los autores argumentan que las regiones deben ser vistas como aglomeraciones ecosistémicas de entidades organizacionales e institucionales que interactúan en un contexto socio-técnico, socio-económico y socio-político. Estas interacciones se manifiestan a través de acciones, reacciones y dinámicas de desarrollo emprendedor, que incluyen la exploración, explotación y despliegue de recursos y capacidades.

El estudio conceptualiza los ecosistemas emprendedores regionales como configuraciones fractales, multi-nivel, multi-modal, multi-nodales y multilaterales, lo que implica que estos ecosistemas están en constante evolución y adaptación, integrando tanto elementos tangibles como intangibles. La investigación busca proporcionar un marco teórico que permita entender mejor cómo estos ecosistemas co-opetitivos pueden ser habilitados y ejecutados, y cómo pueden contribuir al desarrollo sostenible y a la innovación en las regiones.

El artículo presenta un enfoque innovador para entender la complejidad de los ecosistemas emprendedores, destacando la importancia de la colaboración y la competencia entre diferentes actores en la búsqueda de objetivos comunes. Se propone un modelo que puede servir como guía para futuras investigaciones y prácticas en el ámbito del emprendimiento y la innovación regional. Se abordan conceptos complejos relacionados con la gestión de activos tanto tangibles como intangibles dentro del marco de la teoría basada en recursos y la nueva teoría del crecimiento de la empresa.

Se introduce el concepto de "co-opetitive fractal innovation", que combina la cooperación y la competencia entre empresas para fomentar la innovación. Este enfoque sugiere que las empresas pueden beneficiarse al colaborar en ciertas áreas mientras compiten en otras, creando un ecosistema de innovación más dinámico y adaptable.

Además, se discuten los ecosistemas de emprendimiento, que son redes de actores que interactúan para fomentar la creación y el crecimiento de nuevas empresas. Estos ecosistemas son cruciales para el desarrollo regional, ya que pueden impulsar la innovación y el crecimiento económico en áreas específicas. Se mencionan ejemplos de innovación regional, analizando casos concretos donde estas teorías y conceptos se aplican en la práctica, destacando la importancia de la colaboración y la competencia en el desarrollo de nuevas ideas y tecnologías.

El texto también aborda políticas y programas relacionados con sistemas de innovación a múltiples niveles, centrándose en la existencia de clústeres de conocimiento y redes de innovación. Se proponen diferentes agregaciones de estos sistemas de innovación, considerando tanto sus propiedades funcionales espaciales (geográficas) como no espaciales (basadas en la investigación).

**Introducción:**
El documento conceptualiza las regiones como aglomeraciones ecosistémicas de entidades organizacionales e institucionales que enfrentan conflictos y convergencias en sus objetivos socio-técnicos, socio-económicos y socio-políticos. Estas entidades persiguen sus metas a través de acciones de desarrollo empresarial, exploración, explotación y despliegue (DEED), así como a través de reacciones e interacciones.

El enfoque principal del estudio es la dinámica de los ecosistemas fractales co-opetitivos a nivel regional, utilizando una versión extendida del modelo Triple Hélice, conocida como el Marco del Sistema de Innovación Cuádruple/Quintuple Hélice. Este marco se describe como una aglomeración de empresas, instituciones y otros actores que interactúan de manera compleja y no lineal, formando un sistema de producción de conocimiento caracterizado por su autoorganización y aprendizaje de orden superior, denominado "Modo 3" del Sistema de Producción de Conocimiento.

Los ecosistemas analizados se denominan Ecosistemas de Innovación y Emprendimiento Fractales Co-opetitivos Espaciales y Sectoriales (CS2FIE2). El objetivo principal del artículo es explorar la equivalencia entre la visión ecosistémica de la creación, difusión y uso del conocimiento y el marco del Sistema de Innovación Cuádruple/Quintuple Hélice. A través de esta exploración, se busca proporcionar un marco teórico para los ecosistemas de innovación co-opetitivos a nivel regional dentro del contexto de la Cuádruple/Quintuple Hélice, así como discutir cuestiones relacionadas con la agenda de investigación actual y futura.

En resumen, el texto se centra en la interrelación entre diferentes actores en un ecosistema de innovación, proponiendo un marco teórico que integra la complejidad de las interacciones y el aprendizaje en la creación de conocimiento, y sugiriendo direcciones para futuras investigaciones en este ámbito. Se abordan cuestiones actuales y futuras relacionadas con la agenda de investigación en el contexto del marco del Sistema de Innovación de la Doble/Triple Hélice, ampliado a la Cuádruple y Quintuple Hélice. El objetivo principal del documento es explorar y perfilar la naturaleza y dinámica de este sistema de innovación como un facilitador y ejecutor de ecosistemas emprendedores co-opetitivos a nivel regional. Se conceptualizan estos ecosistemas como configuraciones fractales, multi-nivel, multi-modal, multi-nodal y multilaterales, que integran activos tangibles e intangibles dentro de la perspectiva basada en recursos y la nueva teoría del crecimiento de la empresa.

En este contexto, se definen y discuten los ecosistemas de innovación y emprendimiento co-opetitivos y fractales, presentando ejemplos de políticas, programas y proyectos de innovación regional. Además, se menciona un concepto visual (Figura 1) que ilustra el marco del Sistema de Innovación de la Cuádruple/Quintuple Hélice desde una perspectiva CS2FIE2, adaptado de Carayannis y Campbell (2010). El documento se enmarca dentro de la gestión de investigación y desarrollo, destacando la importancia de estos ecosistemas en la promoción de la innovación y el emprendimiento en diversas regiones.

Finalmente, se hace referencia a la publicación en la que se encuentra el artículo, indicando que está disponible en la Wiley Online Library, y se mencionan las condiciones de uso y la licencia de Creative Commons que rige los artículos de acceso abierto. El texto analiza los sistemas de innovación multinivel, considerando la existencia de clústeres de conocimiento y redes de innovación. Se proponen agregaciones alternativas de estos sistemas basadas en propiedades funcionales tanto espaciales (geográficas) como no espaciales (basadas en la investigación). Se destaca el modelo de Triple Hélice de producción de conocimiento, desarrollado por Etzkowitz y Leydesdorff en 2000, que enfatiza la interrelación de tres "hélices" que generan un sistema de innovación: las universidades (academia), la industria y el gobierno estatal. Este modelo se centra en las relaciones y redes entre universidad, industria y gobierno, subrayando la importancia de las "redes trilaterales y organizaciones híbridas" donde estas hélices se superponen.

El modelo de Triple Hélice se considera un "modelo central" para la innovación, resultante de las interacciones en la producción de conocimiento que involucran a las universidades (educación superior), la industria (economía) y los gobiernos (multinivel). Además, el modelo de Triple Hélice se contextualiza dentro del marco más amplio del modelo de Cuádruple Hélice, que incluye al gobierno, la universidad, la industria y la sociedad civil, integrando características del ámbito público, como la sociedad civil y los medios de comunicación (Carayannis y Campbell, 2011).

Los componentes del sistema de Triple Hélice se dividen en esferas institucionales: universidad, industria y gobierno. Los actores dentro de estas esferas se diferencian en dos categorías principales: los ejecutores de I+D, que se encuentran en las universidades como instituciones universales de producción y difusión de conocimiento, abarcando tanto las artes como las ciencias, y que a menudo integran y fertilizan de manera cruzada estas modalidades aparentemente divergentes en unidades interdisciplinarias. Por otro lado, están los actores no relacionados con I+D, que participan en contextos como el diseño, la producción, el marketing, las ventas, la adopción de tecnología, el cambio incremental, la combinación de conocimientos existentes de nuevas maneras, la interacción con usuarios, y la adquisición de patentes y licencias, entre otros. El texto aborda el concepto de sistemas de innovación en el contexto de la interacción entre academia, industria y gobierno, conocido como el modelo de Triple Hélice. Carayannis y Rakhmatullin (2014) identifican dos tipos principales de relaciones que inducen cambios en estos sistemas:

1. **Colaboración y moderación de conflictos**: Este tipo de relación incluye la provisión de servicios de investigación y desarrollo (I+D) y consultoría, la construcción de competencias, la formación de nuevos mercados o la consolidación de los existentes. También abarca la creación y modificación de organizaciones o instituciones, el establecimiento de redes, la transferencia de tecnología, la adquisición de bienes y servicios a través de interacciones de mercado o no de mercado, así como actividades de incubación, financiamiento y negociación.

2. **Sustitución**: En este caso, las relaciones surgen cuando cada esfera institucional, además de cumplir con sus funciones tradicionales, asume roles de otras esferas para llenar vacíos que se presentan cuando una esfera está débil o no puede o no quiere desempeñar su función habitual.

Además, Carayannis y Campbell (2009) proponen un modelo ampliado conocido como el "Quadruple Helix Innovation System Framework". Este modelo añade una "cuarta hélice" que representa al "público basado en medios y cultura". Esta cuarta hélice se relaciona con los medios de comunicación, las industrias creativas, la cultura, los valores, los estilos de vida, el arte y la noción de la "clase creativa", un término acuñado por Florida en 2004.

El enfoque del Quadruple Helix enfatiza la necesidad de integrar al público en los sistemas avanzados de innovación, sugiriendo que una comprensión más amplia de la producción de conocimiento y la aplicación de la innovación requiere la participación activa de la sociedad. Este marco pone un mayor énfasis en la cooperación en la innovación y en los procesos dinámicamente entrelazados de co-opetición (competencia y cooperación) y co-evolución. El texto aborda el concepto de innovación, centrándose en los procesos interrelacionados de co-opetición, co-evolución y co-especialización dentro de los ecosistemas de innovación regionales y sectoriales. Estos procesos, según Carayannis y otros autores, son fundamentales para desarrollar estrategias de especialización inteligente que promuevan estructuras de innovación sistémicas y centradas en el usuario.

El marco del Sistema de Innovación de la Cuádruple Hélice destaca la importancia de los usuarios, o ciudadanos, como protagonistas en los procesos de innovación. Se argumenta que los usuarios no solo son receptores de innovaciones, sino que también son dueños y motores de estas, participando activamente en el desarrollo de productos, servicios y soluciones innovadoras. Arnkil et al. (2010) sugieren que la participación del usuario puede incluir el concepto de "diseño por usuarios", donde los usuarios actúan como usuarios líderes, co-desarrolladores y co-creadores.

Además, se menciona el concepto de Triple Hélice, que distingue entre dos modos de producción de conocimiento: el "Modo 1" y el "Modo 2". El "Modo 1" se refiere a la producción de conocimiento basada en universidades, alineada con un modelo lineal de innovación. En contraste, el "Modo 2" enfatiza la aplicación del conocimiento y la resolución de problemas, siendo compatible con un enfoque no lineal de la innovación.

En resumen, el texto resalta la necesidad de integrar a los usuarios en el proceso de innovación y cómo esto puede transformar las estrategias de innovación hacia un enfoque más colaborativo y centrado en las necesidades de la sociedad. El texto aborda el modelo de innovación propuesto por Carayannis y Campbell, conocido como ‘Mode 3’, que se introdujo en 2009 y se centra en la incorporación de un cuarto actor, la sociedad civil, al marco del Sistema de Innovación de la Hélice Cuádruple. Este modelo permite y enfatiza la coexistencia y co-evolución de diferentes paradigmas de conocimiento e innovación. En el núcleo de este modelo se encuentra el Sistema de Producción de Conocimiento ‘Mode 3’, que es fundamental para comprender y gestionar tanto el modelo ‘Mode 3’ como las Hélices de Innovación Cuádruple y Quintuple.

El ‘Mode 3’ expande y extiende las arquitecturas de los Sistemas de Producción de Conocimiento ‘Mode 1’ y ‘Mode 2’, proponiendo una arquitectura conceptual helicoidal, dinámica, compleja y no lineal para la creación, difusión y uso del conocimiento. Este sistema está dotado de capacidades de aprendizaje de orden superior, que incluyen aprender, aprender a aprender y aprender a aprender cómo aprender. Además, se alinea con la perspectiva del ‘Ecosistema como Hélice’ en los ecosistemas regionales co-opetitivos, conocidos como CS2FIE2.

El documento se organiza en cuatro secciones adicionales. La Sección 2 proporciona el contexto teórico del conocimiento co-opetitivo y sus vínculos con el marco del Sistema de Innovación Cuádruple/Quintuple, incluyendo una discusión detallada sobre el Sistema de Producción de Conocimiento ‘Mode 3’. La Sección 3 explora cómo se puede aplicar el marco del Sistema de Innovación de la Hélice Cuádruple en iniciativas de innovación regional. La Sección 4 contextualiza los sistemas de innovación regional dentro de sistemas multi-nivel de Hélices de Innovación Cuádruple y propone enmarcaciones espaciales y no espaciales. Finalmente, la Sección 5 ofrece un resumen de las conclusiones.

El ‘Mode 1’ de producción de conocimiento se refiere principalmente a la investigación básica realizada por universidades. Sin embargo, Carayannis et al. (2017a) argumentan que ha surgido un nuevo tipo de universidad emprendedora, la universidad ‘Mode 3’. Esta universidad se define como una organización capaz de aprendizaje de orden superior, que opera como un sistema de producción de conocimiento abierto, altamente complejo y no lineal, buscando formas creativas de combinar, recombinar e integrar diferentes principios de producción y aplicación del conocimiento. Las universidades ‘Mode 3’ también cruzan sus procesos de producción y aplicación del conocimiento con empresas.

El papel de las universidades en el desarrollo económico regional se examina a menudo bajo el concepto de Transferencia de Tecnología Universitaria (UTT), considerando la compleja red de partes interesadas regionales. Miller et al. (2016) enfatizan la necesidad de una UTT más abierta y co-creativa, que involucre a los interesados en la innovación basada en la sociedad. Este enfoque genera una red compleja de partes interesadas de la Hélice Cuádruple involucradas en diversas etapas del proceso de UTT. Para examinar la naturaleza dinámica y evolutiva de la UTT, se destaca el cambio de un marco de Sistema de Innovación de Triple Hélice a uno de Hélice Cuádruple. Además, el modelo ‘Mode 3’ se relaciona con un ecosistema de conocimiento e innovación fractal, bien configurado para la economía del conocimiento, enfatizando la co-evolución, co-especialización y co-opetencia de diversas configuraciones de creación, difusión y uso del conocimiento. El concepto de ecosistemas de innovación fractales se ha desarrollado más en el contexto de la educación, la investigación y la innovación, dando lugar al concepto de FREIE (Fractal Research, Education and Innovation Ecosystem). El texto aborda diferentes modelos de producción de conocimiento en el contexto de la innovación, centrándose en las propuestas de Carayannis y Campbell. Se inicia con la descripción del 'Modo 1', que se refiere a la investigación básica realizada por el sector de educación superior, organizada en una estructura disciplinaria y alineada con el modelo lineal de innovación. En contraste, el 'Modo 2' se centra en la aplicación del conocimiento y la resolución de problemas basados en el conocimiento, destacando principios como la producción de conocimiento en el contexto de aplicación, la transdisciplinariedad, la heterogeneidad y diversidad organizacional, la responsabilidad social y la reflexividad, así como el control de calidad.

El concepto de innovación Triple Hélice se relaciona con las ideas de producción de conocimiento de 'Modo 1' y 'Modo 2'. A partir de esto, Carayannis y Campbell proponen el 'Modo 3', que se caracteriza por un enfoque de Sistema de Producción de Conocimiento que incluye 'Redes de Innovación' y 'Clústeres de Conocimiento' para la creación, difusión y uso del conocimiento. Este 'Modo 3' se describe como un sistema multi-capa, multi-modal, multi-nodal y multi-lateral, que abarca redes de innovación y clústeres de conocimiento que son complementarios y se refuerzan mutuamente, integrando capital humano e intelectual, moldeado por el capital social y respaldado por el capital financiero.

Además, el 'Modo 3' se combina con la perspectiva ampliada del Cuádruple Hélice del Sistema de Innovación, que enfatiza un ecosistema de innovación que fomenta la co-evolución de diferentes modos de conocimiento e innovación, equilibrando modos de innovación no lineales en el contexto de sistemas de innovación a múltiples niveles. Mercan y Göktaş (2011) definen un ecosistema de innovación en relación con el Cuádruple Hélice, describiéndolo como un conjunto de agentes económicos y relaciones económicas, así como partes no económicas que incluyen tecnología, instituciones, interacciones sociológicas y cultura. Durst y Poutanen (2013) sugieren que este enfoque implica que un ecosistema de innovación es un entorno complejo donde interactúan diversos elementos económicos y no económicos, lo que contribuye a la dinámica de la innovación. El texto aborda la noción de un ecosistema de innovación como una combinación de diversas redes o sistemas, enfatizando la importancia de la interacción entre individuos y entidades (como grupos y organizaciones) en la articulación y amplificación del conocimiento. Esta idea se apoya en la literatura clásica sobre co-opetición y teorías evolutivas de las empresas, donde se considera a la firma como un repositorio de conocimiento. La perspectiva basada en el conocimiento de una firma tiene sus raíces en la literatura de gestión estratégica y en la visión basada en recursos, que fue inicialmente formulada por Penrose en 1959 y posteriormente ampliada por otros autores como Barney en 1991.

Además, se destaca el papel significativo que pueden desempeñar las universidades en la creación, difusión y uso del conocimiento en un contexto de co-opetición. El modelo de negocio tradicional de las universidades era implícito y abarcaba una variedad de actividades orientadas a cumplir su misión central de enseñanza, investigación y difusión del conocimiento en la sociedad. Sin embargo, Etzkowitz y otros (2000) señalan que este modelo está en transición hacia un rol más emprendedor. Este nuevo modelo de negocio universitario evolutivo depende de múltiples relaciones con partes interesadas, ya que su nuevo enfoque se basa en la transferencia de conocimientos y habilidades entre universidades, empresas y la sociedad en general.

En resumen, el texto subraya la interconexión entre el conocimiento, las universidades y las empresas dentro de un ecosistema de innovación, donde la colaboración y la co-opetición son fundamentales para el desarrollo y la difusión del conocimiento. El texto aborda el concepto de FREIE (Fractal Research, Education, and Innovation Ecosystem), desarrollado por Carayannis y Campbell en 2011. Este concepto se presenta como un sistema complejo y multifacético que integra la educación, la investigación y la innovación. FREIE se caracteriza por ser multilayered (multicapa), multimodal (multimodal), multi-nodal (multinodal) y multilateral, lo que implica que abarca diversas redes de innovación y clústeres de conocimiento que son complementarios y se refuerzan mutuamente.

El sistema FREIE se fundamenta en el capital humano e intelectual, que a su vez está influenciado por el capital social. Este enfoque destaca la importancia de las interacciones y colaboraciones entre diferentes actores en el ecosistema de innovación, lo que permite la creación y difusión de conocimiento. El texto también menciona la representación gráfica de las universidades "Mode 3" dentro de ecosistemas emprendedores co-opetitivos, lo que sugiere un enfoque dinámico y colaborativo en la producción de conocimiento.

Además, se citan varias obras de Carayannis y Campbell que exploran temas relacionados con la innovación, la creación de conocimiento y la dinámica de los sistemas de producción de conocimiento en el contexto de la "Quadruple Helix" y "Mode 3". Estas obras abordan conceptos como la destrucción creativa impulsada por el conocimiento, la diplomacia de innovación abierta y la importancia de la transdisciplinariedad en la innovación no lineal.

El texto también menciona la evolución de estos conceptos a lo largo del tiempo, destacando la necesidad de adaptarse a las demandas del siglo XXI en términos de democracia, innovación y emprendimiento para el desarrollo. En resumen, el FREIE se presenta como un marco integral que busca fomentar la colaboración y la innovación a través de la interacción de múltiples actores y recursos en un ecosistema dinámico. El texto aborda el concepto de "Mode 3" en el contexto de la innovación y el desarrollo regional, destacando su capacidad para permitir la coexistencia y coevolución de diferentes paradigmas de conocimiento e innovación. Este enfoque se complementa con el marco del Sistema de Innovación de la Hélice Cuádruple, que promueve un ecosistema de innovación que favorece la co-evolución de diversos modos de conocimiento e innovación, así como el equilibrio de modos de innovación no lineales dentro de sistemas de innovación a múltiples niveles, tal como lo proponen Carayannis y Campbell (2009).

Se concluye que tanto el "Mode 3" como el marco de la Hélice Cuádruple/Quíntuple pueden servir como base para diversas estrategias de especialización inteligente, ya que enfatizan la cooperación en la innovación y los procesos interrelacionados de co-opetencia, co-evolución y co-especialización. Se menciona que para una discusión más profunda sobre el conocimiento co-opetitivo, se puede consultar el trabajo de Brandenburger y Nalebuff (1997).

La aplicación de un marco de Sistema de Innovación de la Hélice Cuádruple/Quíntuple permite a los responsables de políticas regionales facilitar un proceso emprendedor centrado en el lugar y en los tres pilares de sostenibilidad (económica, social y ambiental), que incluye un proceso de descubrimiento seguido de una intensa experimentación y DEED (Desarrollo, Experimentación, Evaluación y Difusión), lo que resulta en una alta cantidad y calidad de innovación sostenible y social.

En la sección dedicada a la "Hélice Cuádruple en la innovación regional", se menciona la estrategia Europa 2020, que es una agenda de política económica integral centrada en tres prioridades: crecimiento inteligente, sostenible e inclusivo. La estrategia de especialización inteligente adoptada por la UE busca aprovechar los activos socioeconómicos de una región, que pueden ser desarrollados y explotados a nivel mundial para una rápida difusión del conocimiento, un enfoque conocido como Estrategia de Investigación e Innovación para la Especialización Inteligente (RIS3). Este principio de especialización inteligente requiere que las regiones se basen en sus propias fortalezas y gestionen un proceso de establecimiento de prioridades en el contexto de las políticas nacionales y regionales. El texto aborda la importancia de construir sobre las fortalezas propias y gestionar un proceso de establecimiento de prioridades en el contexto de las estrategias de innovación nacionales y regionales, tal como lo señala la Comisión Europea en 2012. Sin embargo, Edwards et al. (2015) subrayan que aún se requiere un trabajo adicional para lograr un entendimiento común del concepto de "descubrimiento emprendedor" y, lo más crucial, para operacionalizarlo de manera efectiva en las políticas de desarrollo nacional y regional. Esto es esencial para facilitar el aprendizaje de lecciones y la transferencia de buenas prácticas entre fronteras.

Durante la implementación de las Estrategias de Especialización Inteligente (RIS3), es fundamental monitorear de manera continua las actividades, resultados y productos de políticas, lo que permitirá un feedback efectivo en el proceso de revisión de la estrategia. Esto implica que RIS3 debe ser capaz de ajustarse y adaptarse continuamente a las condiciones cambiantes del contexto socioeconómico.

La Comisión Europea ha respaldado recientemente una versión del Marco del Sistema de Innovación de Cuádruple Hélice en su "Guía RIS3". Este marco puede servir como un plano arquitectónico de innovación que involucra simultáneamente cuatro perspectivas sectoriales. La eficacia y sostenibilidad de este marco dependen de las interfaces de conocimiento y aprendizaje intersectoriales, intra-sectoriales, interregionales e intra-regionales que están integradas en su diseño.

La combinación de estas cuatro perspectivas busca conceptualizar, contextualizar, diseñar, implementar y evolucionar ecosistemas de emprendimiento e innovación que sean inteligentes, sostenibles e inclusivos, así como clústeres, redes y otras aglomeraciones a nivel regional, según Carayannis y Rakhmatullin (2014). La identificación y los roles de los actores de innovación en un sistema de innovación regional han sido objeto de estudio extensivo en la literatura. El objetivo principal de estos estudios es examinar los factores que contribuyen al desarrollo exitoso de un sistema de innovación regional dentro del marco de Cuádruple Hélice. El texto aborda el desarrollo exitoso de un sistema regional de innovación dentro del marco del Cuádruple Hélice, que incluye la interacción entre cuatro actores clave: el gobierno, la industria, la academia y la sociedad civil. Se menciona un estudio de Lew et al. (2016) que analiza las conexiones internacionales para explicar la dinámica de los sistemas de innovación en la región de Trentino, destacando la evolución del modelo de Triple Hélice hacia el Cuádruple Hélice.

La sociedad civil, como cuarto pilar del Cuádruple Hélice, representa acciones y perspectivas de abajo hacia arriba. Para aprovechar al máximo estas contribuciones, se sugiere que los responsables de políticas implementen mecanismos como el crowd-sourcing y el crowd-funding en sus iniciativas. La inclusión de estos elementos podría facilitar un aprendizaje más rápido, amplio, económico y resiliente, así como mejorar las dinámicas de "aprender a aprender" y "aprender a aprender cómo aprender".

Además, las capacidades de redes sociales que se activan a través del cuarto pilar aumentarían la probabilidad y el impacto de eventos de serendipia del conocimiento y de arbitraje del conocimiento, es decir, "accidentes felices". Estos eventos inesperados pueden actuar como desencadenantes, catalizadores y aceleradores de dinámicas de exploración y explotación, lo que podría potenciar significativamente cualquier estrategia del Cuádruple Hélice.

Por último, Carayannis y Rakhmatullin (2014) presentan ejemplos de excelencia en el contexto nórdico, sugiriendo que estas prácticas pueden servir como modelos a seguir para el desarrollo de sistemas de innovación regionales efectivos. El texto aborda la adopción del Cuádruple Hélice del Sistema de Innovación, presentando ejemplos de iniciativas y empresas en un contexto regional que ilustran este marco. A continuación, se detallan los ejemplos y conceptos clave mencionados:

1. **Start-Up Sauna**: Este es un acelerador de negocios que, aunque originalmente fue fundado por jóvenes entusiastas, ahora cuenta con financiamiento de sectores gubernamentales, empresariales y académicos. Se localiza en un almacén en mal estado junto a la Universidad Aalto, lo que refleja un entorno de innovación que combina recursos de diferentes sectores.

2. **Linas Matkasse**: Co-fundada por Niklas Aronsson, esta empresa aplica el modelo de "hazlo tú mismo" de IKEA a las cenas familiares. Ofrece bolsas con todos los ingredientes necesarios para preparar una comida, ya cortados y listos para cocinar. Este ejemplo resalta que muchos emprendedores en la región operan en el extremo bajo del espectro tecnológico, enfocándose en soluciones prácticas y accesibles.

3. **Asunto Oy Helsingin Loppukiri**: Esta asociación de vivienda privada en Finlandia ha desarrollado una comunidad residencial en los suburbios de Helsinki, con el objetivo de reinventar los hogares de retiro para los baby boomers. Este enfoque busca adaptar la vivienda a las necesidades cambiantes de una población envejecida.

4. **Rovio Entertainment**: Conocida por el popular juego Angry Birds, que consiste en lanzar aves irritadas contra fortalezas construidas por cerdos malvados. Este ejemplo ilustra cómo la innovación en el entretenimiento digital puede surgir de la creatividad y la tecnología.

El texto también menciona la importancia de una estructura de gobernanza multinivel para formular e implementar estrategias de investigación e innovación efectivas, como lo argumentan Carayannis y Rakhmatullin (2014). Carayannis (2008) introduce el concepto de "arbitraje de conocimiento estratégico y serendipia" (SKARSE), donde:

- **Serendipia del conocimiento estratégico**: Se refiere a los beneficios no intencionados que surgen al permitir que el conocimiento "se derrame" entre empleados, grupos y dominios funcionales, lo que se traduce en "accidentes felices" en el aprendizaje.
  
- **Arbitraje de conocimiento estratégico**: Representa la capacidad de crear, identificar, redistribuir y recombinar activos de conocimiento de manera más eficiente y rápida.

Finalmente, el texto sugiere que, al considerar los diferentes niveles de clústeres, se presentan dos perspectivas principales. Desde la perspectiva de los actores, se hace evidente que se requieren estrategias regionales basadas en el modelo de Triple Hélice dentro de sistemas de innovación regional abiertos. Esto implica una colaboración activa entre los sectores académico, gubernamental y empresarial para fomentar un entorno propicio para la innovación. El texto aborda la necesidad de implementar sistemas de innovación regional abiertos basados en el modelo de la Triple Hélice, que enfatiza la interacción entre academia, industria y gobierno. Desde una perspectiva sistémica, se destaca la importancia de la coherencia a niveles más altos (internacional/global) para aprovechar las economías de escala dinámicas, lo que implica la necesidad de una gobernanza multinivel. Esto sugiere que es fundamental fomentar la convergencia estratégica entre los actores en diferentes niveles de política.

Se concluye que la especialización inteligente es una estrategia que puede impulsar la innovación en cualquier región. Cuando se aplica correctamente, utilizando elementos como los clústeres, puede convertirse en una herramienta poderosa dentro del marco del Sistema de Innovación de la Cuádruple Hélice. Este marco incluye a los cuatro actores clave: academia, industria, gobierno y sociedad civil.

Además, se menciona el enfoque de Living Lab, que ha ganado atención entre académicos, como un método para co-crear modelos de negocio de innovación regional. Este enfoque permite la colaboración activa de todos los actores involucrados en el proceso de innovación, facilitando la generación de conocimiento estratégico, la serendipia y el arbitraje, conceptos que se ilustran en el modelo SKARSETM (Strategic Knowledge, Serendipity, and Arbitrage).

En resumen, el texto enfatiza la importancia de la colaboración y la gobernanza multinivel en la innovación regional, destacando la especialización inteligente y el enfoque de Living Lab como herramientas clave para fomentar el desarrollo y la competitividad en un contexto de Cuádruple Hélice. El texto aborda la presencia activa de grupos de actores dentro del marco del Sistema de Innovación de la Hélice Cuádruple, destacando ejemplos característicos del enfoque de Living Lab. Se menciona a Laurea, una universidad de ciencias aplicadas orientada a la investigación y desarrollo (I+D) ubicada en el área metropolitana de Helsinki, que se centra en innovaciones en servicios. Según Hirvikoski (2016), la estrategia de Laurea integra tres tareas fundamentales: educación, I+D y desarrollo regional. Las actividades de I+D de la universidad se concentran en el bienestar, servicios empresariales intensivos en conocimiento y responsabilidad social. En este contexto, se ha desarrollado el modelo "Learning by Developing" (LbD) como herramienta para alcanzar y poner en práctica sus objetivos estratégicos.

Laurea actúa como una organización anfitriona para varios Living Labs y como proveedor de servicios de innovación en este contexto, gracias a su proceso de innovación basado en LbD y sus múltiples ubicaciones. Otro ejemplo relevante es el Proyecto Estratégico de Innovación Alcotra, financiado bajo el Programa Alcotra, que tiene como objetivos principales establecer Living Labs transfronterizos para mejorar la competitividad y las capacidades de innovación de los territorios, así como sensibilizar a los responsables políticos sobre el enfoque de Living Lab. En la primera fase del proyecto, cada región organizó talleres locales para aumentar la conciencia entre los actores de la Hélice Cuádruple y sobre la idea de Living Lab transfronterizo. Se identificaron nuevos patrones de especialización territorial (inteligente) con el apoyo del marco del Sistema de Innovación de la Hélice Cuádruple.

Además, se menciona el proyecto Arctic Smart City Living Lab, que busca construir un modelo operativo como un proceso dinámico, estratégico y transformador para la organización pública de la ciudad. En este caso, toda la ciudad funciona como un escenario de Living Lab, aplicando principios de aprendizaje anticipatorio y orientado al futuro. El texto aborda el concepto de "Living Lab" en el contexto de un modelo operativo que se presenta como un modelo de negocio para las ciudades, fundamentado en principios de aprendizaje anticipatorio y orientado al futuro. Se menciona la aplicación de los marcos del Sistema de Innovación de Cuádruple y Quíntuple Hélice en diversas investigaciones empíricas, con el objetivo de comprender mejor los ecosistemas de innovación y emprendimiento.

El marco de Cuádruple Hélice destaca la relevancia de la sociedad civil y las estructuras políticas en el proceso de innovación, mientras que el marco de Quíntuple Hélice pone un mayor énfasis en la sostenibilidad y el medio ambiente. A pesar de que se han realizado múltiples estudios sobre estos marcos, la mayoría de ellos se centran en aspectos específicos y limitados de estas teorías.

Un ejemplo de esto es el trabajo de Carayannis et al. (2017b), que revisa los Tableros de Innovación nacionales y regionales, considerando las diferentes preferencias de los actores involucrados en la innovación bajo el marco de Cuádruple Hélice. Este enfoque permite desarrollar políticas y prácticas que se orienten hacia actores específicos de la Cuádruple Hélice.

En otro contexto, Carayannis et al. (2016b) presentan un marco de evaluación y clasificación integrado para la eficiencia de la innovación a nivel nacional y regional. Siguiendo la definición de innovación de Schumpeter (1934), proponen un enfoque multietapa que considera las diferentes fases de producción y comercialización del conocimiento. Además, modelan la coexistencia y coevolución de los sistemas de innovación nacionales y regionales a través de un enfoque multinivel.

Los resultados de eficiencia se analizan bajo el marco de Cuádruple Hélice para investigar cómo los factores relacionados con los actores de la Cuádruple Hélice influyen en el rendimiento estimado a nivel nacional y regional. Carayannis et al. (2016b) sugieren que este enfoque puede ser una herramienta valiosa para la formulación de políticas y la mejora de la eficiencia en los sistemas de innovación. El texto aborda la importancia de los sistemas de innovación regional y su contextualización dentro de un marco más amplio conocido como "sistemas de innovación de múltiples niveles". Carayannis et al. (2016b) sugieren que este enfoque puede ser una herramienta valiosa para la comparación entre países o regiones y para la formulación de políticas, además de ofrecer una comprensión más profunda de la naturaleza y dinámica del proceso de innovación en sus diferentes etapas y niveles.

Se destaca que el término "región" no es un concepto estandarizado y puede tener al menos dos significados. Primero, puede referirse a unidades locales o entidades subnacionales, lo cual es común en el lenguaje de la Unión Europea (UE), donde una región puede cruzar fronteras de estados-nación. Segundo, "regional" también puede referirse a agrupaciones de diferentes estados-nación, como es el caso de la Región de América Latina.

El texto argumenta que el análisis de los sistemas de innovación regionales debería enmarcarse en un contexto más amplio, el de los sistemas de innovación de múltiples niveles. Este enfoque de gobernanza de múltiples niveles "desnacionaliza" la visión y evaluación de los procesos de innovación, sugiriendo que la base lógica para los sistemas de innovación regionales no debe limitarse a las fronteras nacionales. 

En resumen, el texto enfatiza la necesidad de adoptar una perspectiva más amplia y flexible al estudiar los sistemas de innovación, reconociendo la complejidad y diversidad de las interacciones que ocurren a diferentes niveles y en diferentes contextos geográficos. El texto aborda el concepto de "sistemas multi-nivel" en el contexto de la innovación, enfatizando la necesidad de definir qué constituye un sistema y cuáles son las características que lo definen como multi-nivel. Se menciona la interpretación de Bengt-Åke Lundvall, quien parafrasea a Boulding (1985) al afirmar que un sistema puede considerarse como lo opuesto al caos. Lundvall (1992) proporciona una definición más detallada, describiendo un sistema como un conjunto de elementos interrelacionados. 

Kuhlmann (2001) complementa esta idea al definir un sistema como una conglomeración de actores, instituciones y procesos que están funcionalmente interconectados, donde las funciones centrales de cada uno sirven como criterios de demarcación frente a otros subsistemas sociales. En la definición de un sistema, se combinan dos aspectos clave: los elementos que lo componen y la racionalidad interna del sistema. 

Finalmente, se sugiere una definición de sistema basada en las contribuciones de Campbell (2001) y Carayannis et al. (2016), aunque el texto no proporciona la definición exacta. Además, se menciona un modelo de negocio relacionado con el proyecto de innovación Alcotra, aunque no se detalla su contenido. El texto se enmarca dentro de un contexto académico, citando diversas fuentes y autores que han contribuido a la comprensión de los sistemas en la gestión de la investigación y el desarrollo. El texto aborda la complejidad de los sistemas, destacando varios conceptos clave relacionados con la teoría de la innovación y la interconexión de elementos dentro de estos sistemas. A continuación, se presenta un resumen detallado de los puntos principales:

1. **Elementos de los Sistemas**: Se establece que los sistemas están compuestos por elementos o partes que interactúan entre sí. Esta interacción es fundamental para el funcionamiento del sistema en su conjunto.

2. **Auto-racionalidad**: Cada sistema posee una lógica interna o auto-racionalidad que organiza su auto-organización y reproducción. Esta lógica también regula las relaciones entre los elementos dentro del sistema y entre el sistema y otros sistemas externos.

3. **Teoría de la Innovación**: En este contexto, se enfatiza la importancia de las redes de innovación y los clústeres de conocimiento. Estas redes ofrecen nuevas perspectivas sobre cómo se produce la innovación, destacando la necesidad de conexiones que trasciendan fronteras disciplinarias, transdisciplinarias y sectoriales.

4. **Sistemas Sectoriales de Innovación**: Se menciona el concepto de sistemas sectoriales de innovación, como lo propuesto por Malerba, que se relaciona con la idea de clústeres y redes. Esto sugiere que los clústeres de conocimiento, como las "ciudades inteligentes", son ejemplos de cómo se pueden agrupar elementos para fomentar la innovación.

5. **Interconexión de Sistemas**: Se plantea que si un sistema está integrado en un sistema más grande, puede ser interpretado como un clúster o un elemento de un meta-sistema. Además, se sugiere que los elementos o clústeres dentro de un sistema pueden ser evaluados para determinar si también pueden considerarse subsistemas o micro-sistemas, lo que refleja características fractales en su estructura y proceso.

6. **Gobernanza Multinivel**: Según Kübler, la gobernanza multinivel en la Unión Europea está impulsada por tres tendencias principales que interactúan de manera entrelazada. Esta gobernanza se asocia con la des-nacionalización, el fortalecimiento del nivel supranacional, así como el empoderamiento de las regiones y la sociedad civil.

7. **Modelo de Triple Hélice**: El modelo de Triple Hélice se centra en las relaciones entre la universidad, la industria y el gobierno, como un marco fundamental para la producción de conocimiento y la innovación. Este modelo resalta la importancia de la colaboración entre estos tres actores para fomentar un entorno propicio para la innovación.

En resumen, el texto explora la interrelación entre los elementos de los sistemas, la auto-racionalidad que los organiza, y cómo estos conceptos se aplican a la teoría de la innovación a través de redes y clústeres, así como la gobernanza multinivel y el modelo de Triple Hélice. Estos elementos son cruciales para entender cómo se produce la innovación en contextos complejos y dinámicos. El texto aborda la evolución de los modelos de producción de conocimiento e innovación, centrándose en el concepto de "Triple Helix" y su comparación con los marcos de innovación "Quadruple Helix" y "Quintuple Helix". El modelo de Triple Helix se presenta como un modelo básico para la producción de conocimiento y la aplicación de la innovación dentro de la economía del conocimiento. Sin embargo, los marcos de Quadruple y Quintuple Helix están diseñados para captar la complejidad inherente a la producción y aplicación del conocimiento, lo que les confiere una arquitectura analítica más amplia y conceptual.

Los bloques de construcción de los sistemas de innovación Quadruple y Quintuple Helix permiten enriquecer y ampliar los diseños y arquitecturas de los sistemas de innovación a múltiples niveles, contextualizando de manera más adecuada las comprensiones y significados de los sistemas de innovación regionales. Esto implica que estos marcos no solo se limitan a la producción de conocimiento, sino que también consideran las interacciones y relaciones que se dan en diferentes contextos.

En cuanto a los enfoques espaciales y no espaciales, se menciona que el enfoque de sistema a múltiples niveles puede abordar diferentes capas, que van desde lo global hasta lo local, pasando por lo supranacional, nacional y regional. En este contexto, el sistema nacional de innovación se presenta como uno de los entendimientos centrales. Lundvall (1992) define el sistema nacional de innovación como un conjunto de elementos y relaciones que interactúan en la producción, difusión y uso de conocimiento nuevo y económicamente útil, destacando que este sistema abarca elementos y relaciones que están dentro de las fronteras de un estado-nación. Además, se enfatiza que el sistema nacional de innovación es un sistema social, donde el aprendizaje, considerado una actividad social, juega un papel crucial, ya que implica la interacción entre personas.

Lundvall también reconoce desde el principio la importancia de los niveles global y regional en la innovación, sugiriendo que tanto la globalización como la regionalización pueden ser interpretadas como procesos que influyen en la dinámica de la innovación. En resumen, el texto destaca la necesidad de modelos más complejos y contextuales para entender la innovación en un mundo interconectado, donde las interacciones sociales y las relaciones entre diferentes niveles son fundamentales para el desarrollo del conocimiento y la innovación. El texto aborda la relación entre la innovación, la globalización y la regionalización, sugiriendo que ambos procesos pueden interpretarse como factores que debilitan ciertos aspectos de los sistemas de innovación. Se menciona una definición formalizada de sistemas, clústeres de conocimiento y redes de innovación, que se basa en la conceptualización de los autores, adaptada de Carayannis et al. (2016). 

El concepto de "ecosistema" se presenta como una estructura en forma de hélice, lo que implica una interconexión dinámica entre diferentes actores y elementos dentro del ámbito de la investigación y el desarrollo (I+D). Este enfoque sugiere que la innovación no ocurre de manera aislada, sino que es el resultado de interacciones complejas entre diversas entidades, como universidades, empresas y gobiernos.

El artículo se publica en la revista R&D Management y se encuentra bajo la licencia de Creative Commons, lo que permite su uso bajo ciertas condiciones. Se destaca la importancia de entender cómo la globalización y la regionalización influyen en la capacidad de los sistemas de innovación para adaptarse y evolucionar en un entorno cambiante. 

En resumen, el texto enfatiza la necesidad de un enfoque holístico para comprender la innovación, considerando tanto las dinámicas globales como las regionales, y cómo estas afectan la creación y difusión del conocimiento en redes interconectadas. El texto aborda la conceptualización de los sistemas de innovación nacionales, destacando la importancia de entenderlos dentro de un marco de arquitecturas multi-nivel. Según Lundvall (1992), es fundamental reconocer que el nivel nacional no puede ser analizado de manera aislada, sino que debe ser contextualizado en relación con los niveles globales y regionales (subnacionales y locales). Esto implica que la noción de un sistema nacional de innovación carece de sentido si no se considera simultáneamente la identificación de los niveles global y regional.

Lundvall también sugiere que el concepto de sistemas de innovación regionales debe ser contextualizado dentro de este marco multi-nivel. Esto significa que los sistemas de innovación regionales deben ser entendidos en relación con los sistemas nacionales y globales, lo que permite una comprensión más completa de su funcionamiento y relevancia.

Además, se menciona que los sistemas de innovación regionales están siendo desarrollados de manera más sostenible, ampliando su alcance e incorporando elementos del marco del Cuádruple y Quíntuple Hélice de Innovación. Este enfoque ha sido respaldado por estudios de campo recientes, especialmente en países escandinavos y nórdicos, que han demostrado la efectividad de este modelo (referencias a Grundel y Dahlström, 2016; Kolehmainen et al., 2016).

El texto también introduce la idea de un ecosistema de innovación y emprendimiento a nivel espacial (regional o nacional), que se caracteriza por la co-evolución de diferentes subsistemas, como el sistema de innovación y el sistema emprendedor. Este ecosistema se describe como un sistema dinámico y complejo, que opera dentro de un marco institucional específico que fomenta la innovación, teniendo en cuenta los intereses económicos nacionales y regionales. Este enfoque busca activar y potenciar innovaciones, tecnologías y capital humano.

Finalmente, se menciona un estudio de caso en Rusia que aplica el concepto de ecosistema de innovación y emprendimiento espacial, aunque el texto no proporciona detalles específicos sobre los hallazgos de este estudio. En resumen, el texto enfatiza la interconexión entre los diferentes niveles de los sistemas de innovación y la necesidad de un enfoque holístico para entender y desarrollar estos sistemas de manera efectiva. El texto aborda el concepto de sistemas de innovación de múltiples niveles, aplicándolo a un estudio de caso en Rusia. Se discute la posibilidad de una elaboración no espacial de estos sistemas, además de la aproximación espacial que sugiere diferentes formas de agregación geográfica. La agregación no solo se refiere a la localización geográfica, sino también a la identificación de diferentes sistemas funcionales o subsistemas, analizando cuáles son más específicos o amplios en su alcance analítico.

Se propone un enfoque bidimensional para la agregación de sistemas de innovación, donde se compara un eje espacial (geográfico) con un eje no espacial (basado en la investigación). Al enfatizar el eje de investigación del conocimiento, se puede aplicar la lógica de múltiples niveles al referirse a sistemas de innovación de múltiples niveles. Se sugieren dos direcciones para la agregación: funcionalmente, desde la investigación y desarrollo (I+D) hacia la ciencia y tecnología (S&T) y finalmente hacia la innovación; geográficamente, desde lo subnacional (local) hacia lo nacional y transnacional (supranacional, global).

El texto también menciona que este ejercicio bidimensional podría extenderse a una agregación de sistemas de innovación de múltiples niveles en n dimensiones. En las conclusiones, se explora la validez de considerar un ecosistema como una hélice, específicamente en relación con el marco del Sistema de Innovación de la Hélice Cuádruple/Quintuple. Se propone un marco teórico para el estudio y diseño de ecosistemas de innovación co-opetitivos regionales y sectoriales, en el contexto de la Hélice Cuádruple/Quintuple.

Este marco se presenta como un facilitador de ecosistemas de innovación y emprendimiento, permitiendo modelar y predecir la naturaleza y dinámica de los elementos constitutivos de dichos ecosistemas, que incluyen entidades gubernamentales, universidades, industrias y la sociedad civil, operando bajo un mandato de triple resultado (social, financiero y ambiental). La investigación hasta la fecha ha mostrado el potencial de este enfoque para facilitar configuraciones dinámicas y complejas de recursos tangibles e intangibles con una inclinación hacia el emprendimiento y la innovación. Se destacan casos de innovación en modelos de negocio regionales como ejemplos de esta propuesta. El texto presenta un resumen de un trabajo de investigación que se centra en la innovación de modelos de negocio a nivel regional, destacando casos específicos que ilustran el concepto de Innovación Fractal Espacial y Sectorial Co-opetitiva y Ecosistemas Emprendedores (CS2FIE2). Los autores del estudio tienen como objetivo continuar su investigación conceptual y empírica, tanto cualitativa como cuantitativa, para resaltar los desafíos y oportunidades que surgen en el desarrollo, exploración, explotación y despliegue de ecosistemas emprendedores altamente eficaces.

El enfoque principal del trabajo es el desarrollo de métricas y medidas más poderosas y representativas que sirvan como proxies para entender la anatomía y funcionalidad de estos ecosistemas. Además, se busca identificar, parametrizar y calibrar representaciones cualitativas y cuantitativas del rendimiento de los ecosistemas a lo largo del tiempo y el espacio, considerando estos ecosistemas como estructuras de Cuádruple y Quíntuple Hélice. Este enfoque tiene como objetivo superar las limitaciones actuales en términos de validez, fiabilidad y generalizabilidad que surgen de métricas y medidas que están restringidas a regiones específicas o casos concretos.

El texto también incluye un agradecimiento por el apoyo recibido en la preparación del artículo, que fue parcialmente realizado en el marco del Programa de Investigación Básica de la Universidad Nacional de Investigación Escuela Superior de Economía (HSE) y con el subsidio otorgado por el Gobierno de la Federación Rusa para la implementación del Programa de Competitividad Global.

Finalmente, se mencionan referencias relevantes que respaldan el trabajo, incluyendo un manual sobre cómo establecer Laboratorios Vivos transfronterizos y un informe final sobre modelos de innovación orientados al usuario en el contexto de la investigación de Cuádruple Hélice. El texto proporcionado es una referencia bibliográfica que incluye varios trabajos académicos y artículos relacionados con la investigación en el ámbito de la gestión, la política de investigación y la colaboración entre universidades y empresas. A continuación, se presenta un resumen detallado de cada una de las referencias mencionadas:

1. **CLIQ Project Research (Working Paper 85/2010)**: Este documento, producido por la Universidad de Tampere, aborda temas relacionados con la investigación y el desarrollo en el contexto de la colaboración entre diferentes actores en el ámbito académico y empresarial. El trabajo está disponible en línea y se centra en la importancia de la investigación en la mejora de la competitividad y la innovación.

2. **Barney, J.B. (1991)**: En su artículo "Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage", Barney explora cómo los recursos de una empresa pueden ser utilizados para lograr y mantener una ventaja competitiva a largo plazo. El autor argumenta que no todos los recursos son iguales y que aquellos que son valiosos, raros, inimitables y no sustituibles son clave para el éxito sostenido de una firma.

3. **Boulding, K.E. (1985)**: En "The World as a Total System", Boulding presenta una visión holística del mundo, analizando cómo los diferentes sistemas interactúan entre sí. Este enfoque sistémico es fundamental para entender las dinámicas complejas en las que operan las organizaciones y las sociedades.

4. **Brandenburger, A. y Nalebuff, B.J. (1997)**: En su libro "Co-Opetition", los autores introducen el concepto de "co-opetition", que combina la cooperación y la competencia entre empresas. Este enfoque sugiere que las empresas pueden beneficiarse al colaborar en ciertas áreas mientras compiten en otras, lo que puede llevar a una mayor innovación y éxito en el mercado.

5. **Campbell, D.F.J. (2001)**: En su artículo sobre la "Política de investigación y tecnología", Campbell examina cómo la financiación pública puede influir en la investigación universitaria. Utilizando un enfoque teórico de sistemas, el autor analiza las implicaciones de la política pública en la producción de conocimiento y en la dirección de la investigación.

6. **Campbell, D.F.J. (2006)**: En este trabajo, Campbell investiga las redes de investigación entre universidades y empresas en el contexto de la ciencia y la tecnología, centrándose en las tendencias de producción de conocimiento en Estados Unidos y la Unión Europea. El autor destaca la importancia de estas redes para la innovación y el desarrollo tecnológico.

7. **Ecosystem as Helix (R&D Management, 2018)**: Este artículo discute el concepto de "ecosistema" en la investigación y el desarrollo, sugiriendo que la colaboración entre diferentes actores (universidades, empresas, gobiernos) es esencial para fomentar la innovación. Se menciona que la gestión de la I+D debe considerar estas interacciones para ser efectiva.

En resumen, el texto presenta una serie de trabajos que abordan la intersección entre la investigación académica, la política pública y la colaboración entre sectores, destacando la importancia de los recursos, las redes de cooperación y el enfoque sistémico en la gestión de la innovación y el desarrollo tecnológico. El texto presenta una serie de referencias académicas que abordan el concepto de innovación desde diversas perspectivas, centrándose en marcos teóricos como el de la "Quadruple Innovation Helix" y su relación con el desarrollo sostenible y la economía del conocimiento. A continuación, se ofrece un resumen detallado de los principales puntos tratados en las obras citadas:

1. **MCDA y el marco de la cuádruple hélice de innovación**: Este artículo, publicado en "Technological Forecasting and Social Change", explora cómo la toma de decisiones multicriterio (MCDA) se integra en el marco de la cuádruple hélice de innovación, que incluye la interacción entre la academia, la industria, el gobierno y la sociedad civil. Se enfatiza la importancia de estas interacciones para fomentar la innovación y el cambio social.

2. **Evaluación de la eficiencia de los sistemas de innovación**: Carayannis, Grigoroudis y Goletsis (2016) presentan un enfoque de Evaluación de Eficiencia de Análisis de Datos (DEA) que permite evaluar la eficiencia de los sistemas de innovación en múltiples niveles y etapas. Este enfoque multiobjetivo busca identificar áreas de mejora en la innovación.

3. **Estrategias de especialización inteligente**: En su trabajo, Carayannis y Rakhmatullin (2014) discuten cómo las estrategias de especialización inteligente pueden contribuir al crecimiento sostenible e inclusivo en Europa y más allá, integrando los conceptos de la cuádruple y quintuple hélice de innovación.

4. **Relación entre conocimiento, innovación y medio ambiente**: Carayannis y Campbell (2010) proponen un marco para analizar de manera transdisciplinaria cómo se relacionan el conocimiento, la innovación y el medio ambiente, sugiriendo que estas interacciones son cruciales para el desarrollo sostenible y la ecología social.

5. **Ecosistemas de innovación y emprendimiento**: Dubina et al. (2017) presentan un marco conceptual para el desarrollo equilibrado de ecosistemas de innovación y emprendimiento, basado en principios de compromiso sistémico. Este enfoque busca armonizar las diversas dinámicas que influyen en la innovación.

6. **Factores de éxito en ecosistemas de innovación**: Durst y Poutanen (2013) realizan una revisión de la literatura sobre los factores que contribuyen al éxito de los ecosistemas de innovación, destacando la importancia de la colaboración y la co-creación en el proceso de innovación.

7. **Transformación económica regional a través de la especialización inteligente**: Edwards et al. (2015) abordan cómo la especialización inteligente puede ser un motor para la transformación económica en regiones, sugiriendo que las políticas deben alinearse con las capacidades y recursos locales.

8. **Capital de riesgo público**: Etzkowitz et al. (2000) discuten las fuentes de financiamiento gubernamental para emprendedores tecnológicos, destacando el papel del capital de riesgo público en el fomento de la innovación.

9. **Dinámicas de innovación**: Etzkowitz y Leydesdorff (2000) analizan las dinámicas de la innovación a nivel nacional, proponiendo que la interacción entre diferentes actores es fundamental para el desarrollo de un entorno innovador.

En conjunto, estos trabajos subrayan la complejidad de los sistemas de innovación y la necesidad de enfoques integrados que consideren múltiples actores y factores en el proceso de innovación, así como su impacto en el desarrollo sostenible y la economía del conocimiento. El texto presenta una serie de referencias académicas que abordan el tema de la innovación y su relación con diferentes actores sociales, como universidades, industrias y gobiernos. A continuación, se ofrece un resumen detallado de cada una de las obras citadas:

1. **Etzkowitz y Leydesdorff (2000)**: En su artículo "The dynamics of innovation: from national systems and 'Mode 2' to a Triple Helix of university-industry-government relations", los autores analizan la evolución de los sistemas de innovación, proponiendo el modelo de la Triple Hélice, que enfatiza la interacción entre universidades, industrias y gobiernos como motor de innovación. Este enfoque sugiere que la colaboración entre estos tres sectores es crucial para el desarrollo de nuevas tecnologías y la competitividad económica.

2. **European Commission (2012)**: El "Guide to research report and innovation strategies for Smart Specialisations (RIS3)" proporciona directrices para la formulación de estrategias de especialización inteligente en la Unión Europea. Este documento destaca la importancia de identificar y desarrollar áreas de especialización que aprovechen las fortalezas regionales, fomentando así la innovación y el crecimiento económico sostenible.

3. **Florida (2004)**: En "The Rise of the Creative Class and How It’s Transforming Work, Leisure, Community and Everyday Life", Richard Florida argumenta que la clase creativa, compuesta por profesionales en campos como la tecnología, el arte y la cultura, está transformando la economía y la sociedad. Florida sostiene que las ciudades que atraen a esta clase creativa son más innovadoras y competitivas, lo que resalta la importancia de un entorno favorable para la creatividad.

4. **Gibb (2010)**: En "Towards the Entrepreneurial University: Entrepreneurship Education as a Lever for Change", Gibb explora cómo la educación en emprendimiento puede transformar las universidades en instituciones más dinámicas y orientadas al mercado. Propone que fomentar una cultura emprendedora en las universidades puede ser un motor de cambio significativo en la educación superior y en la economía.

5. **Grundel y Dahlström (2016)**: En su artículo "A Quadruple and Quintuple Helix approach to regional innovation systems in the transformation to a forestry-based bioeconomy", los autores introducen los modelos de Cuádruple y Quíntuple Hélice, que amplían el concepto de la Triple Hélice al incluir a la sociedad civil y el medio ambiente en los sistemas de innovación. Este enfoque es particularmente relevante en el contexto de la bioeconomía basada en la silvicultura.

6. **Hirvikoski (2016)**: En el documento sobre la red de "Laurea Living Labs", se discute la importancia de los laboratorios vivos como espacios de innovación donde se pueden probar y desarrollar nuevas ideas en colaboración con la comunidad. Este enfoque práctico permite la co-creación de soluciones innovadoras que responden a las necesidades locales.

7. **Iivari (2016)**: En "Exploring business models in ecosystemic contexts", Iivari investiga cómo los modelos de negocio pueden adaptarse y evolucionar dentro de contextos ecosistémicos. Este estudio es relevante para entender cómo las empresas pueden innovar y prosperar en entornos interconectados y dinámicos.

8. **Kahn (2016)**: En "Mitigating South Africa’s HIV epidemic: the interplay of social entrepreneurship and the innovation system", Kahn examina cómo el emprendimiento social puede contribuir a la mitigación de la epidemia de VIH en Sudáfrica. El artículo destaca la importancia de integrar la innovación social en los sistemas de salud para abordar problemas complejos.

9. **Kimatu (2016)**: En "Evolution of strategic interactions from the triple to quad helix innovation models for sustainable development in the era of globalization", Kimatu analiza la evolución de las interacciones estratégicas en los modelos de innovación, enfatizando la necesidad de un enfoque más inclusivo que considere múltiples actores en el desarrollo sostenible.

10. **Kolehmainen et al. (2016)**: En su artículo sobre la Cuádruple Hélice, la innovación y el desarrollo basado en el conocimiento, los autores extraen lecciones de regiones remotas y desfavorecidas. Este estudio resalta cómo la colaboración entre diferentes sectores puede impulsar la innovación y el desarrollo en contextos desafiantes.

En conjunto, estas obras reflejan un enfoque multidimensional hacia la innovación, destacando la importancia de la colaboración entre diversos actores y la adaptación a contextos específicos para fomentar el desarrollo económico y social. El texto presenta un resumen de varios artículos y contribuciones académicas relacionadas con el desarrollo basado en el conocimiento, la política de innovación en Europa y las contribuciones de varios autores en el campo de la gestión de la investigación y el desarrollo (I+D). A continuación, se detalla cada componente relevante:

1. **Desarrollo Basado en el Conocimiento**: Se menciona un artículo titulado "Knowledge-based development: lessons from remote, rural and less-favoured regions", publicado en el *Journal of the Knowledge Economy*. Este trabajo explora cómo las regiones remotas y menos favorecidas pueden beneficiarse del desarrollo basado en el conocimiento, sugiriendo que la innovación y el conocimiento son claves para mejorar la situación económica y social de estas áreas.

2. **Política de Innovación en Europa**: Kuhlmann (2001) presenta tres escenarios futuros para la gobernanza de la política de innovación en Europa en su artículo "Future governance of innovation policy in Europe: three scenarios", publicado en *Research Policy*. Este análisis es crucial para entender cómo se pueden estructurar las políticas de innovación para adaptarse a los cambios en el entorno global y tecnológico.

3. **Contribuciones de los Autores**:
   - **Elias G. Carayannis**: Es un autor destacado en el campo de la gestión de la I+D, y su trabajo se centra en la intersección entre el conocimiento, la innovación y el desarrollo económico.
   - **Evangelos Grigoroudis**: Es profesor asociado en la Universidad Técnica de Creta, Grecia, y ha sido reconocido por su trabajo en la gestión de procesos de calidad. Ha publicado extensamente sobre calidad de servicio, estrategia empresarial y enfoques de decisión multicriterio.
   - **David F. J. Campbell**: Investigador en el Instituto de Comunicación Científica y Investigación en Educación Superior, y docente en la Universidad de Viena. Su enfoque se centra en la política comparativa y la innovación, habiendo obtenido un doctorado habilitado en Ciencias Políticas.
   - **Dirk Meissner y Dimitra Stamati**: Aunque no se proporciona información detallada sobre sus contribuciones, se les menciona como coautores en el contexto de la investigación sobre I+D.

4. **Publicaciones y Reconocimientos**: Grigoroudis ha sido distinguido por varias organizaciones y actúa como revisor para más de 60 revistas científicas. Además, ha editado y escrito numerosos libros y artículos sobre temas relacionados con la calidad y la gestión.

5. **Acceso a Artículos**: Se menciona que los artículos están disponibles a través de Wiley Online Library, y se proporcionan enlaces y términos de uso, lo que indica un enfoque en la accesibilidad y la difusión del conocimiento académico.

En resumen, el texto destaca la importancia del desarrollo basado en el conocimiento en regiones desfavorecidas, la evolución de la política de innovación en Europa y las contribuciones significativas de varios académicos en el campo de la gestión de la I+D.
