ELSEVIER  ISRAELI WOMEN  ENTREPRENEURS:  AN EXAMINATION OF  FACTORS AFFECTING  PERFORMANCE  MIRI LERNER  University £[ Tel A viv  CANDIDA BRUSH  Boston University  ROBERT HISRICH  Case Western Reserve University  This article examines individual factors influencing performance of 200 Is-  EXECUTIVE raeli women-owned businesses. Whereas research on women entrepreneurs  SUMMARY is extensive in developed countries', especially in the United States and Eu-  rope, there are comparatively few studies of performance of women-owned  businesses in non-OECD countries. There is evidence that social structures  (work, family, and organized social life) vary among developed and devel-  oping countries as these relate to women entrepreneurs. However, these differences have not been consid-  ered as they may relate to theories explaining performance of women-owned businesses. The extent to  which existing theories are useful in the context of non-OECD countries is of increasing importance as  women in these countries are assuming a greater role in enterprise creation and economic deveh)pment  as a result of radical geopolitical and economic policy changes worldwide.  In Israel, women suffer from occupational segregation and typically earn less money than their  male counterparts, despite a generally high level of education. Entrepreneurship offers a vehicle for Israeli  women to achieve economic parity. Approximately 5.1% of Israeli women are self-employed (compared  with 15 % of lsraeli men) of the 816,800 Israeli working women. This study is the first systematic investiga-  tion of performance variation among Israeli women entrepreneurs, thereby contributing to our under-  standing of women's entrepreneurship in non-OECD countries.  Address correspondence to Robert D. Hisrich, Department of Marketing and Policy Studies, Weatherhead  School of Management, Case Western Reserve University, Enterprise Hall, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH  44106-7235.  Journal of Business
University, Enterprise Hall, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH  44106-7235.  Journal of Business Venturing 12, 315-339  © 1997 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.  655 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10010 0883-9026/97/$17.00  PII S0883-9026( 96)00061-4
316 M. LERNER ET AL.  Five theoretical perspectives explain performance: individual motivations and goals; social learning  (entrepreneurial socialization); network affiliation (contacts and membership in organizations); human  capital (level of education, business skills); and environmental influences (location, sectoral participation,  and sociopolitical variables). Each of these perspectives is associated with empirical work showing rela-  tionships between these individual level factors and performance. Three questions directed this study:  (1) Which factors influence the performance of lsraeli women entrepreneurs? (2) Which factors explain  any variance in performance among businesses established by Israeli women entrepreneurs? (3) How  similar are these explanatory factors to those found in other countries?  A sample of 220 Israeli women business-owners responded to a survey instrument originally com-  posed by Hisrich and Brush (1982, 1985) that was translated into Hebrew and adapted to the particular  conditions of the lsraeli population. A majority of the questionnaires was distributed at meetings of profes-  sional associates of women entrepreneurs and returned by mail, but one-fourth was distributed to women  who were not members of any professional association. No significant differences were found between  the respondents who were members or non-members of associations. Reliability testing showed alpha  coefficients of 0.65 and higher for scaled questions, which is acceptable for survey data. Statistical analy-  ses, including Pearsons's correlations and multiple regressions, examined relationships between factors  identified from theoretical perspectives and performance, which was measured by profitability, income,  size (number of employees), and revenues.  Demographic variables were examined, and the age of the woman entrepreneur's children was sig-  nificantly related to profitability (p < .01). The majority of lsraeli women entrepreneurs are
nificantly related to profitability (p < .01). The majority of lsraeli women entrepreneurs are married and  became entrepreneurs after their children were grown. This is consistent with the strong family orientation  prevalent in the Israeli culture and the existence of institutional arrangements that support the working  mother model as long as she gives priority to family responsibilities.  Of the five theoretical perspectives, results showed network affiliation, motivation, human capital,  and environmental factors affected different aspects of performance, whereas social learning theory or  existence of a role model had no significant effect on performance outcomes. Network affiliation was  significantly related to profitability (p <.001), and the use of outside advisors also was related to revenue.  In contrast, participation in multiple networks was negatively related to revenue, income, and size of  the business.  Motivations showed a strong relationship to performance. Factor analysis identified three basic  groups of motives: achievement, independence, and economic necessity. Similar to findings in other coun-  tries, achievement motives were highly related to personal income, whereas economic necessity was sig-  nificantly related to both profitability and revenue.  Analyses of human capital variables showed mixed results; education level, areas of study, and pre-  vious entrepreneurial experience had no effect on previous experience. The fact that this population was  highly educated (51% had university degrees) may have impacted on this result. Consistent with prior  research findings, previous experience in the industry had a direct and significant effect on performance  (p <.001). Previous salaried employment and involvement in the creation of a business were significantly  correlated with sales and number of employees. Results also showed that indexes of women entrepreneurs"  business skills (obtainingfinancing, budgeting, labor management, and
of women entrepreneurs"  business skills (obtainingfinancing, budgeting, labor management, and planning ahead) were highly cor-  related with revenues (p < .01). Regression analysis showed the business skill index significantly related  to profitability (p < .01). Environmental factors were significantly related to performance in that the  sectoral affiliation (service versus manufacturing) was related to revenues and employees, but not to  profitability and income.  This study supports previous research from the United States and Europe on women entrepreneurs,  which found that performance is related to previous industry experience, business skills, and achievement  motivation. However, the differential effects of network affiliations was significantly more important for  women entrepreneurs in Israel. Affiliation with a single network was highly related to profitability,  whereas involvement in multiple networks was detrimental to both revenues and the number of employ-  ees. These findings imply that to perform well, Israeli women entrepreneurs should gain related industry  experience, develop business skills, and seek to achieve success. Most importantly, commitment to a single  network for support and advice is better than a loose alignment with many support groups.
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 317  This research has implications for studies of women entrepreneurs in other non-OECD as well as  developing countries. In countries such as Russia or China, anecdotal evidence shows self-employment  offers women an opportunity to improve their economic status as more capitalistic policies are adopted.  The extent to which individual factors found important in this study, such as business skills, motivations,  previous industry experience, and network affiliation, affect performance in these countries is a topic  for future investigation. This study suggests that individual factors affect performance differentially as  a consequence of variations in social structures, work, organized social life, and family. Future research  should explore the extent to which this is the case. Examination of aspects of organizational strategies  and government policies as these influence performance is another topic for future study. © 1997 Else-  vier Science Inc.  INTRODUCTION  Research on women entrepreneurs is extensive in developed countries, especially in  the United States and Canada. These studies comprise a growing body of knowledge  from which theories are emerging and prescriptions for success are derived. However,  studies of women entrepreneurs in non-OECD as well as developing countries are com-  paratively scarce (Allen and Truman 1993). This is a critical omission from our under-  standing of women's entrepreneurship, because the role of women entrepreneurs con-  tributing to modernization of developing economies as well as facilitating enterprise  development in transition economies is of increasing importance (OECD 1993). Fur-  thermore, social structures, work, family, and organized social life (Aldrich 1989) vary  widely in developing countries (Truman and Allen 1993). Because the theories have  emerged primarily from research in developed countries, it is important to examine the  extent to which these apply in the context of
developed countries, it is important to examine the  extent to which these apply in the context of non-OECD countries.  Israel is one such country where women seek self-employment as a means to over-  come occupational segregation and participate in economic development. The small  size of this country, its predominantly strong family orientation, and overall higher edu-  cation level of women reflect social structures that differ from many developed coun-  tries, a Moreover, little is known about performance of Israeli women-owned businesses.  The purpose of this article is to examine effects of individual factors on performance  of Israeli women-owned businesses, compared with what is known about factors influ-  encing performance from OECD countries. Being the first systematic study of Israeli  women entrepreneurs, the research was guided by three questions:  1. Which factors influence the business performance of Israeli women entrepreneurs?  2. Which factors explain any variance in performance of businesses of Israeli  women entrepreneurs?  3. How similar are these explanatory factors to those found in research conducted in  other countries?  These questions are addressed in the following sections, which provide a back-  ground on the impact of social structures on women's entrepreneurship generally, pre-  sent an overview of the Israeli context, and address theoretical perspectives ex-  plaining performance.  According to the World Bank's "World Development Report, 1990," Israel is a less developed country  in the high income category.
318 M. LERNER ET AL.  IMPACT OF SOCIAL STRUCTURES ON  WOMEN'S ENTREPRENEURSHIP  Sociological theories argue that social structures (workplace, family, and organized so-  cial life) affect women's access to entrepreneurial opportunities and may influence per-  formance (Aldrich 1989). Occupational segregation, underrepresentation in upper level  management positions, and expectations about family roles may restrict women to cer-  tain industrial sectors, as well as affect motivations and goals for their business ventures  (Aldrich 1989). The extent to which women entrepreneurs face structural barriers in  these areas will arguably have an impact on the performance of their ventures.  The degree to which these structural dimensions affect women entrepreneurs  depends greatly on the country context. In particular, the perceived acceptability of  women's participation in entrepreneurship varies from country to country, relative  to the expectations and cultural norms for women in that society. For example, in  South America belief in "male machismo" and expectations that women's primary re-  sponsibilities are childcare and domestic duties creates a barrier to venture creation  and subsequent venture performance (Sekarun and Leong 1992). Relatedly, in Muslim  countries women are subject to dishonoring their husbands by taking on entre-  preneurial roles (Epstein 1993). In the Philippines, women's movement into high level  management positions is impeded by expectations that women must marry and have  a family, effectively limiting the type of work experience women are able to obtain prior  to self-employment (Epstein 1993). In transition economies, such as Hungary, lack of  child care and unavailability of training in basic business skills are even greater obstacles  for women entrepreneurs (OECD 1993). In Eastern European countries, women have  low levels of education and technical knowledge, which further restricts the ability of  women to succeed in their
and technical knowledge, which further restricts the ability of  women to succeed in their entrepreneurial endeavors (OECD 1993). Research also re-  veals that women starting new ventures are frequently hindered by a lack of business  information, advice, and access to networks and business support systems (Allen and  Truman 1993).  It is important to note that public policy initiatives designed to increase wom-  en's access to information, skill improvement, and funding (OECD 1993; Allen and  Truman 1993) are underway in many developing countries. Still, the relative impact  of the effect of social structures in non-OECD and developing countries differs from  that in the United States and Canada where more than 30% of all small companies are  women-owned, social networks and support systems are well developed, and women  have equal access to entrepreneurial training and information resources (OECD 1993;  Brush 1991). Further, women from some OECD countries are increasingly accepted  as equals in their entrepreneurial endeavors, making it easier for their businesses to  succeed and grow.  These differences in social structures across developed and developing countries  suggest variation in individual factors affecting performance of women-owned busi-  nesses. To date, studies examining the performance of women-owned businesses in non-  OECD and developing countries are very limited. Furthermore, the theories explaining  performance were based on populations from developed OECD countries that may or  may not be applicable in other country contexts. The extent to which these theories  explain individual effects on performance in one country--Israel--is examined. Israel  is representative of a small non-OECD country where social systems--work, family,  and organized social life--differ from those in other countries.
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 319  TABLE 1 Israeli Employers and Self-Employed  1991 1993  Men Women Men Women  Employers 7 % 1.4 % 7.3 % 1.3 %  Self-Employed 11.6 % 4.3 % 9.3 % 3.8 %  Total 18.6% 5.7% 15.6"/o 5. 1%  THE ISRAELI CONTEXT  The pursuit of careers or even a career orientation for women in Israel has been viewed  negatively by some people (Izraeli 1994). During the 1980s and 1990s, women joined  the labor force in greater numbers, today comprising about 44% of the labor force (Sta-  tistical Abstract of Israel 1994). However, occupational segregation still exists in several  industry sectors. The fact that almost three-quarters of the female labor force is em-  ployed in only three of nine major occupational categories, whereas half is concentrated  in only eight of the 90 occupations (Cohen et al. 1987), is evidence of structural condi-  tions. Israeli women are overrepresented in service industries and in clerical occupa-  tions, and the average income in these occupations is considerably lower than in other  occupations (Izraeli 1978; Semyonov and Kraus 1982). Furthermore, in spite of the  "equal payment" law, several studies indicate that Israeli women in the labor force are  paid less than men working in the same occupation (Efroni 1980). It is estimated that the  hourly income of women employed full-time is about 71% of that of men, with women  receiving a lower rate of return than men on their human capital resources (Efroni 1980;  Azmon and Izraeli 1993). Women with the same human capital capabilities as men have  fewer opportunities for advancement within organizations (Shenhav and Haberfeld  1993).  The wage disparity between men and women exists for all occupational categories,  including scientific and academic workers, where average monthly income was 5,463  NIS for men, and 3,090 NIS for women [3 NIS (Israeli shekels) = U.S. $1]. Although  the number of weekly hours men work is slightly greater, in professional and technical  jobs the gap is
number of weekly hours men work is slightly greater, in professional and technical  jobs the gap is similar (4,392 NIS for men versus 2,541 for women), whereas in adminis-  trative and managerial categories the disparity is 7,321 NIS for men versus 4,862 for  women (Special Statistical Report No. 2963 1994). Although a recent law was enacted  specifying equal opportunity in employment, it has had little impact on prevailing pat-  terns of recruitment, job allocation, promotion, and reward, thereby retaining the gen-  der earnings gap (Azmon and Izraeli 1993).  Sectoral differences between men and women carry over into business ownership.  Entrepreneurship in service and retail are viewed as part of the nonsponsored segment  of the labor market (Lerner 1989, 1991), which means there is absence of government  support in areas of loans or grants. Most women-owned businesses are typically retail  or service, falling into the nonsponsored segment of the market.  Because of these differential opportunity structures for employment in salaried  jobs, turning to self-employment could be a means for women to overcome these struc-  tural barriers. However, statistics show that the average percentage of Israeli women  in self-employment has remained stable and comparatively low during recent years, as  indicated in Table 1.  This level of self-employment is lower than nearly all OECD countries where even
320 M. LERNER ET AL.  Greece and Turkey reported rates of 17.9% and 6.3%, respectively, for self-employed  women (Labor Force Statistics, OECD 1990). It appears that the proportion of female  business ownership in Israel will remain stable in the future. One possible cause for  this is the existence of other barriers in the areas of family and organized social life.  Israel is a family-centered society. In 1991, over 95% of all women over 40 were  married and had an average of 2.8 children per family (Izraeli 1994). Although both  men and women value family life, greater and less flexible time demands are made on  women. This encourages women to seek less demanding career paths where work hours  are shorter (Izraeli 1994). Furthermore, women still feel a primary responsibility for  family with organizations typically employing women who support this belief. In select-  ing jobs, women attribute great importance to "convenience"--namely, the extent to  which the job can be accommodated to family life (Azmon and Izraeli 1993). Conse-  quently, there is a general lack of support for women to be involved in management  and administrative endeavors (Izraeli 1994) as well as self-employment.  The fact that few women occupy upper managerial and administrative positions  influences the scope of management connections they are able to develop. However,  women are highly educated and well trained, comprising 50% of all university students  including business administration (Izraeli 1994). In Israel, the influence of the military  is prevalent in every area of public and private life. Women with military careers fre-  quently have better access to networks, both business and government, than those who  do not. Yet most women have limited access to government and business contacts (Iz-  raeli 1994), which limits women's abilities to obtain information and resources necessary  for business creation and growth. There is evidence that networks and social groups  supporting
for business creation and growth. There is evidence that networks and social groups  supporting self-employed women are emerging, and research shows that Israeli women  have stronger needs for affiliation due to greater emphasis on communitarian values  than in the United States (Baum et al. 1993).  It is clear that Israeli women entrepreneurs must overcome structural barriers in  the creation of their businesses, making the question of their businesses' performance  of even greater importance. The theories addressing individual factors explaining per-  formance of women-owned businesses follows.  PERFORMANCE IN WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESS:  THEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND FRAMEWORK  The most comprehensive summary of individual factors influencing performance was  noted in a recent literature review by Cooper and Gascon (1992), which examined such  factors as experience, education, occupation of parents, gender, race, age, and entrepre-  neur's goals. This summary, drawn from previous literature examining performance  (Stevenson and Jarillo 1990; Vesper 1990; Gartner 1985; Cooper 1981), concluded that  successful ventures are more often started by men who are achievement motivated,  manage risk, and engage in systematic planning. Although Cooper and Gascon (1992)  cogently summarized the state of research on the topic to date, their discussion of inde-  pendent variables is not organized according to particular theories or approaches.  Studies of performance of women entrepreneurs are few (Brush 1992), with the  majority of research not being comparative among groups of women and men. However,  individual level variables explaining performance in U.S. studies were frequently the  same as those noted in male-owned businesses: previous occupational experience, busi-
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 321  ness skills, level of education, and personal factors such as motivations and having a  mentor. The largest comparative study in the United States was conducted by Kalleberg  and Leicht (1991) who examined the determinants of survival and success among small  businesses headed by men and women, using longitudinal data. They found that wom-  en's businesses were no more likely to fail and were just as successful as men's, which  was contrary to conventional wisdom regarding women's inferiority in entrepreneur-  ship. This research also found that the determinants of survival and success operated  in much the same way for men and women "suggesting that the processes underlying  small business performance are similar irrespective of an entrepreneur's gender" (Kal-  leberg and Leicht 1991). These findings were supported in a comparative study con-  ducted by Johnson and Storey (1993) in the United Kingdom, which found no significant  differences in survival rates of male- and female-owned businesses, although women-  owned firms were typically smaller and more likely to employ women. Most recently,  Chaganti and Parasuraman (1994) examined strategic approaches of male and female  entrepreneurs as these related to performance, finding similarities across gender, with  the exception that women tended to emphasize quality more than men.  Although these recent studies add to our understanding of performance similarities  and differences, "performance" in entrepreneurial businesses was operationalized dif-  ferently, making it difficult to compare across studies. Most frequently used operational-  izations of performance include survival, growth in employees, and profitability (Srini-  vasan, Woo, and Cooper 1994). For instance, Kalleberg and Leicht (1991) and Johnson  and Storey (1993) examined survival, whereas Chaganti and Parasuraman (1994) exam-  ined financial performance and documented organizational factors as they related  to
(1994) exam-  ined financial performance and documented organizational factors as they related  to performance.  Studies of individual factors influencing performance are prevalent, although the  majority of these were carried out in the United States, Canada, and the United King-  dom. Because the purpose of this study is to consider a context where work, family,  and organized social life differ from non-OECD countries, it will focus on individual  level factors as these influence performance. The following discussion is organized ac-  cording to five theoretical perspectives, each of which has a corresponding body of em-  pirical research. These five perspectives are: (1) motivations and goals, (2) social learn-  ing, (3) network affiliation, (4) human capital, (5) environmental factors (see Figure  1). Hypotheses as to the applicability of each view in explaining performance in the  Israeli context are presented.  Motivations and Goals  Psychological motivations such as achievement, independence, and locus of control  have been widely investigated with regard to their influence on business start-up (Brock-  haus and Horwitz 1986). Fewer studies examined their relationship to business perfor-  mance. U.S. research has found that individual motivations and owner/founder goals  are related to performance in women-owned businesses, where opportunity motivation  was related to survival and independence was associated with "no growth" (Hisrich and  Brush 1987). Other studies indicate few significant performance differences related to  male versus female achievement motivation or individual self-esteem. Women reported  lower levels of self-confidence than did males (Miskin and Rose 1990).  Compared with the United States, the occupational segregation and wage disparit-  ies between men and women in Israel are greater. Due to these structural barriers as
322 M. LERNER ET AL.  I Social Learning Theory "~  Father entrepreneur (y/n) |  Economic status at childhood~  Education level '~ \  Education area ~  Previous occupation  Previous entrepreneurial  experience  Previous employment ~ X  Experience in industry ~  Involvement in start-up "~ \  Business X,  Planning "%1  ~o Areas ofstrengthj ~'~ Business Perfor=nce -~  • Achievement motives Revenues/sales  Independence motives Income • . . D Profitability Econormc necessW motives Goals __ ~. Number of employees  f Networks " ~'~ ~ ~  le Number of networks /  I e Use °fadvis°rs ~'- / I  le Membership in women's ] J /  ~associations I 7 /  ~,,,. Mentors ,,,t/ / /  l" Age I / /  l" Marital status ~ /  l" Number of children ] /  Age of first child j  j-  I* Industry sector  Sources of Finance  FIGURE 1 Model of female business owners' performance.  well as the perceptual barriers that accompany an entrepreneurial career, we might ex-  pect Israeli women entrepreneurs to be motivated by independence and achievement  to ensure solid performance of their businesses. This leads to the following hypothesis:  HI: The influence of motivations and goals will be positively associated with busi-  ness performance.
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 323  Social Learning Theory  A second theoretical approach emphasizes the role of entrepreneurial socialization,  which is anchored in social learning theory (Bandura 1977) as an explanation of entre-  preneurial behavior and career development. Social learning can occur through the ob-  servation of behavior in others, often referred to as role models. The individual's social-  ization process, which occurs in the family setting, transmits social norms, language,  educational aspirations, and shapes career preferences through observational learning  and modeling (Bandura 1977).  The utility of social learning theory to explain entrepreneurial career preferences  was explored in several studies. The effects of observational learning through perceived  parental entrepreneurial role model performance was explored by Scherer et al. (1989).  These authors found that the presence of a parent in an entrepreneurial role was associ-  ated with increased education and training aspirations, task self-efficacy, and expec-  tancy for an entrepreneurial career. The study also showed that individuals with a parent  performing an entrepreneurial role were often high performers and significantly differ-  ent from individuals without role models, who were low performers. Similarly, a Cana-  dian study found that 33% of the women entrepreneurs in this sample reported their  fathers were entrepreneurs (Belcourt, Burke, and LeeoGosselin 1991). One Israeli study  did find a clear link between role models (entrepreneurial fathers) and choice of an  entrepreneurial career by offspring (Lerner 1992). These results support the importance  of entrepreneurial role models in the backgrounds of practicing entrepreneurs identified  in earlier studies (Brockhaus and Horwitz 1986; Hisrich and Brush 1984).  In the Israeli context, a comparatively small percentage of both men and women  are entrepreneurs. The small number of self-employed women suggests women have  fewer
and women  are entrepreneurs. The small number of self-employed women suggests women have  fewer female role models. Because the expectation for women is to choose a career  that is compatible with family life and responsibilities and not to have demanding ca-  reers (Azmon and Izraeli 1994), socialization and norms for women to be entrepreneurs  would be minimal, leading to the following:  H2: The influence of social learning theory will be negatively associated with busi-  ness performance.  Network Affiliation  A third perspective views entrepreneurship as embedded in a complex network of social  relationships. Within these networks, entrepreneurship is facilitated or constrained by  linkages between aspiring entrepreneurs, resources, and opportunities (Aldrich and  Zimmer 1986). According to this view, the presence or absence of networks, such as  access or membership in associations, play a role in influencing performance. The fact  that women entrepreneurs are embedded in different personal and social networks than  men, and that divisions and barriers limit the reach and diversity of their networks~ might  have far-reaching consequences for business performance (Aldrich 1989).  The importance of support systems, mentors, and advisors has been documented  in earlier research. In particular, business associates and friends were identified as being  important to moral support, whereas participation in trade associations and women's  groups was related to business guidance (Hisrich and Brush 1987). Some researchers
324 M. LERNER ET AL.  have stated that access to information and assistance depends on "know-who" (Peterson  and Ronstadt 1987), others arguing that the "old boys" network can be difficult for  women to penetrate (Belcourt et al. 1991). Johannisson (1991) argues that the personal  network of the entrepreneur is the most important resource of the firm. The significance  of personal contacts as an aid to business development has been validated, with a study  showing that strong ties in social networks facilitate the start-up process (Aldrich et  al. 1987). Research from Northern Ireland found women's networks as diverse as men's  (Cromie and Birley 1992). These findings were supported in the United States by Ald-  rich and Elam (1995).  There is evidence that the composition of women's networks is different than men's  (Aldrich et al. 1987), and in many countries women are often excluded from social net-  works or informal networks of information (Brush 1990). One Canadian study assessing  whether women entrepreneurs were creating an old girl's network through business as-  sociations found that although the respondents felt belonging to business groups was  important, they did not often join due to lack of time (Belcourt et al. 1991). These re-  searchers felt that this infrequent use of assistance sources represented a "lost opportu-  nity to break through the isolation of the glass box." Limited use of mentors by women  was found to be a significant inhibitor to successful business development (Carsrud et  al. 1986).  In Israel it was noted earlier that occupational segregation in terms of sectors and  level of managerial responsibility is prevalent. This implies that women will less often  be integrated into certain networks, for instance in the manufacturing, government, or  military sectors. The recent growth of women's associations in Israel suggests women  entrepreneurs might be likely to participate in women-only associations as a means to  gain moral
entrepreneurs might be likely to participate in women-only associations as a means to  gain moral support. Research shows that in collectivist and informal societies like Isra-  el's, success is dependent on personal contacts and relationships with key individuals  who facilitate the start-up (Baum et al. 1993). This leads to the following:  H3: The influence of network affiliation will be positively associated with busi-  ness performance.  Human Capital  The human capital perspective proposes that level of education, area of education, pre-  vious entrepreneurial experience, previous business experience, and business skills will  influence business performance. Cooper (1981) proposed experience and education  were "antecedents" to the decisions to start a company and ultimately affected per-  formance.  Several studies showed that years of formal education of the entrepreneur before  establishing a new firm were related to eventual performance of the firm (Box, White,  and Barr 1993; Brush and Hisrich 1991). Box et al. (1993) also found a relationship be-  tween higher levels of education and increased performance among manufacturing  firms in Oklahoma. Testing the effects of education on business ownership in a longitu-  dinal study, Dolinsky et al. (1993) reported that the levels of staying and reentering a  business increased with higher levels of education. They argued that less educated  women may face financial or human capital constraints that limited their business  pursuits.  Because women in Israel are generally well educated, compared with women in
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 325  many developing countries, it would follow that women entrepreneurs also would be  well educated. Based on the research from developed countries, it is expected that a  high level of education would be associated with better performance, leading to the fol-  lowing:  H4a: The influence of a high level of education will be positively associated with busi-  ness performance.  Hisrich (1986) stated that the high number of service-oriented businesses (over 90%  of the businesses begun by women) reflected the educational focus of women entrepre-  neurs, which generally consisted of a liberal arts college education. This social sciences  or liberal arts educational background might restrict or discourage them from starting  ventures in manufacturing, finance, or technology (Birley et al. 1987; Brush 1990). Statis-  tics in OECD countries indicate that the great majority of women-owned businesses  are concentrated in retail trade and service sectors, which are perceived traditional areas  of female employment (Brush 1990).  Although Israeli women have equal access to every course of study and between  40% and 50% of academic concentrations are composed of women, women in fact are  underrepresented in engineering and management. This equal access implies that  women would be as likely to have degrees in engineering or management as men, lead-  ing to the following:  H4b: The influence of area of education will be positively associated with busi-  ness performance.  The influence of previous entrepreneurial experience upon the success of small busi-  nesses was tested in several studies. Ronstadt (1988) found that longer, more successful  entrepreneurial careers were a function of earlier career starts and involvement in multi-  ple ventures. Prior start-ups and years of entrepreneurial experience were significantly  correlated with performance in a study of 300 manufacturing firms in Tulsa (Box et  al. 1993). On the other hand, Miskin and
in a study of 300 manufacturing firms in Tulsa (Box et  al. 1993). On the other hand, Miskin and Rose (1990) found that previous ownership  experience was not significantly related to profitability of the women in their sample,  but it was significant for males.  The overall small percentage of self-employed women (5.3%) suggests that the ma-  jority of Israeli women entrepreneurs will not have previous start-up experience. This  lack of start-up experience suggests that:  tt4c: The influence of previous start-up experience will have no association with busi-  ness performance.  Many studies of women entrepreneurs find women start ventures in sectors where they  have little experience. Forty percent of women entrepreneurs in a Canadian study re-  ported they had not worked in a related field prior to venture creation. This lack of  experience in a related field was correlated with significantly lower profits (Belcourt  et al. 1991). On the other hand, Hisrich and Brush (1984) found that a majority of their  sample of 468 women entrepreneurs (64%) tended to start businesses in fields where  they had related experience. In a longitudinal study on this sample 5 years later, Brush  and Hisrich (1991) found that among the 172 women business owners responding to  the second survey, related experience was associated with business growth. They con-  cluded that the "antecedent influences" of the women entrepreneurs did in fact affect  business survival and growth.
326 M. LERNER ET AL.  Israeli women are typically employed in services and retailing, as they suffer from  occupational and sectoral segregation, implying that previous experience of women en-  trepreneurs would be predominantly in these areas. Statistics show that women business  owners are more frequently located in the nonsponsored segment of the market, which  is typically service related. Therefore, women entrepreneurs would likely have greater  knowledge of the industries of their ventures, as well as competitive aspects important  to success, leading to the following:  H4d: The influence of related occupational experience will be positively related to  business performance.  The importance of business skills, particularly strength in idea generation and deal-  ing with people, was found to be related to performance in Brush and Hisrich's (1991)  longitudinal study. Since business skills are related to stage of business development,  it is argued that women face challenges of learning business skills early in the life cycle  of their business and are therefore less profitable than in later stages when they are  more competent in business skills (Miskin and Rose 1990). Studies investigating busi-  ness planning skills are mixed--some showing business planning skills related to success  and others showing it does not make a difference. Whereas a recent meta-analysis of 14  research studies confirmed a relationship between planning and performance (Schwenk  and Shrader 1993), these studies focused on the organizational level planning processes  rather than the expertise or gender of the individual owner/founder.  Given that a high percentage of Israeli women work and that it is likely they will  be employed in the service sector and start businesses in this area, it is expected they  would have requisite skills needed to succeed in the area of their business. Because the  structural barriers facing Israeli women might make it more difficult for them to obtain
the  structural barriers facing Israeli women might make it more difficult for them to obtain  resources or suppliers, there should be more reliance on individual skills to succeed,  leading to the following:  H4e: The influence of business skills will be positively associated with business per-  formance.  Environmental Influences  Environmental influences presume that factors including the differential structure of  opportunity, location, sectoral activities, and sociopolitical variables (i.e., availability  of government assistance) are critical determinants of performance. Economic mea-  sures of venture profitability, revenues and number of employees are related to environ-  mental economic conditions, such as the market structure, regional opportunities, in-  vestment climate, availability of labor, and other features (Gibb 1988). Similarly,  resource availability, including venture capital, technical labor force, loans, support ser-  vices, and a favorable entrepreneurial subculture are also a major influence on perfor-  mance (Bruno and Tybjee 1982).  Availability of sufficient start-up capital is reported to be one of the most important  environmental factors influencing success and profitability of new ventures (Brophy  1989). A study of 346 entrepreneurs who utilized a Washington SBDC found no signifi-  cant differences between male and female perceptions of access to start-up capital (Mis-  kin and Rose 1990). Relatedly, studies of women's access to bank loans indicate that
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 327  although women are able to obtain outside financing, they faced perceptual barriers  that they were less capable than their male counterparts (Fay and Williams 1993).  Environmental factors differentially affect the type of business and vary by industry  sector. Historically, women-owned businesses have been concentrated in retail sales.  personal, and educational services (Kalleberg and Leicht 1991). The U.S. Small Busi-  ness Administration (1986) reports that in 1982 nearly half of all women entrepreneurs  participated in service industries, and another 30% were in retail trade. A Canadian  survey found that the retail sector tended to be overrepresented by women entrepre-  neurs (Belcourt et al. 1991). Even though both retailing and services generally have  smaller returns and labor intensity, these sectors are generally easy to enter because of  comparatively small capital investments. Companies in the service and trade industries  generally have lower growth rates and profitability and often confront greater competi-  tion (Kalleberg and Leicht 1991).  In the Israeli context, it is expected that women entrepreneurs will be concentrated  in service and retailing. Following previous research, it is expected that sectoral differ-  ences will affect performance, and that the type of business will determine higher or  lower performance, leading to the following:  H5: The influence of environmental factors will differentially affect performance de-  pending on sector of business participation.  Based on these five theoretical perspectives, an integrated model was developed  (see Figure 1). These five perspectives and the demographic variables comprise the indi-  vidual level variables, which are expected to be differentially associated with perfor-  mance. Although it is recognized that the organizational strategies and goals of organi-  zations will also affect performance, these are not the focus of this study.  RESEARCH
of organi-  zations will also affect performance, these are not the focus of this study.  RESEARCH METHODOLOGY  The database for this research was created from a study conducted in Israel, using a  research instrument that was a comprehensive questionnaire originally based on the  one developed by Hisrich and Brush (1982, 1985), translated into Hebrew. and adapted  to the particular conditions of the Israeli market. Whereas many of the same measures  were used, the study did not replicate Hisrich and Brush's work, having many contextual  and sampling differences. A total of 550 women entrepreneurs were surveyed. The sam-  ple was identified from the membership of four major women entrepreneur associations.  Four different associations were sampled to provide greater heterogeneity and decrease  against any possible bias. Most of the questionnaires were distributed at professional  meetings of women entrepreneur associations and returned by mail. The remainder  were mailed to respondents. There were 220 usable responses, yielding a 40% response  rate. Because sampling from women who are members of business associations could  introduce a source of bias, the sample included women who were not members of wom-  en's organizations as well.  To examine the possibility that consistent differences exist between those women  entrepreneurs belonging to one of the women's business organizations and those women  who do not belong to any such organization, t-test analyses were performed for the main  research variables. These tests were done to examine if there was any bias of selection  in choosing the research population. These analyses revealed that no significant differ-  ences existed among the members versus nonmembers (n = 160, 56, respectively); thus,
328 M. LERNER ET AL.  the selection of one-quarter of the research sample from nonmembers did not cause  any systematic bias. However, there were differences in certain business dimensions;  for instance, the numbers of full-time employees--the members employing more full-  time employees (the means are 5 vs. 10, p < .03), and the average business age--  member's businesses were 3-4 years old, whereas the average business of nonmembers  was 5-45 years (p < .03). In addition, more members prepared business plans for their  ventures than did nonmembers (p < .05). Finally, although there were more retail busi-  nesses among the nonmembers than among the members, whose ventures were mostly  in the services (58%), the difference was not significant. In sum, these t-tests show that  the samples were dissimilar across age and size; however, when these differences are  considered in the larger context of entrepreneurial businesses, all of these entrepreneurs  can be considered small and young. It is not expected that a difference of 2 years in  age or five employees will significantly influence the results given the mean for the en-  tire sample.  Variables  The dependent variables for this research were measures of business performance. Per-  formance measures were based on the following four main indicators, previously used  by Brush and Hisrich (1991) and those commonly used in entrepreneurship research  (Brush and VanderWerf 1992).  1. Size of business: number of employees, number of full-time/part-time employees  2. Profitability: Was your business profitable last year? Three categories of answers:  profitable = 1;/not profitable and not losing money -- 2; losing money = 3  3. Gross revenues: 11 categories from 30,000 IS, up to more than 4 mm IS during the  previous year  4. Income: open-ended question regarding the entrepreneur's monthly income at  present  The independent variables were divided into five groups to capture the dimensions of  all theoretical
independent variables were divided into five groups to capture the dimensions of  all theoretical perspectives:  1. Demographic Variables: age, marital status, number and age of children, father in  business, economic status during childhood, length of residence in Israel,  spouse's occupation.  2. Human Capital: education level, education areas, previous occupation, previous sta-  tus at work (employed/self-employed), previous experience in starting up business,  previous experience in industry, involvement in starting up the current business, and  nature of involvement. Business skills variables included management, planning, and  areas of strength:  a. Management Skills Index: six items ( = 0.74). Each item had five categories from  1 = not important to 5 = very important. The six items were: finance-securing  capital, forecasting, budgeting, dealing with people-management, marketing/  sales-market research, idea generation, product innovation, business operations,  production, daily operation, organizing and planning, business strategy, policies.  A factor analysis of all management skills showed four items (finance, human re-  sources, operations, and strategy) loading on factor 1, reliable at ,/~ = 0.74. Pearson  correlation coefficients between the two items in factor 2, marketing and innova-
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 329  tion, was r = 0.36, which was significant. Because only the first factor's coefficient  was high enough to justify including two factors of management skills, it was de-  cided to use a single index of management skills comprising the five categories.  b. Planning Ahead lndex: six items (reliability analysis scale of these items-- -- 0.83)  Each item had five categories ranging from 1 = less than months to 5 = more  than 2 years. The six items were: planning sales, cash flows, add or drop products,  enter new/exit markets, hiring and other staff decisions, expansion of firm's opera-  tions, changes in plant, building, and equipment. These dimensions were consid-  ered in terms of individual capability rather than firm strategy. Factor analysis  of the planning ahead index found four items loading on factor #1 (planning sales,  cash flow, new products, and entry into new markets) with/k = 0.08. Reliability  analysis coefficients of the remaining three items on factor #2 was also ,/~ = 0.08.  As in the case of the business skills, it was decided to use an index including all  of the skills rather than two separate factors. The planning index included six items  and the reliability of this index was ,/~ -- 0.83.  c. Areas of Entrepreneurial Strength in Business Index: 12 items (,/~ = 0.79) Each  item had five categories ranging from 1 = not an area of strength to 5 = area  of major strength. The 12 items were: location of firm, type of plant, equipment,  product/service quality, pricing, customer service, innovation in products, cost  control, employee productivity, marketing and selling, cash and financial manage-  ment, overall quality of management, and human resource management. Areas  of strength items also were factor-analyzed, but this analysis similarly failed to  produce reliable coefficient values, with factor reliabilities of 0.79, 0.36, and 0.53.  Hence, an area of strength index was developed that showed A = 0.79.  3.
of 0.79, 0.36, and 0.53.  Hence, an area of strength index was developed that showed A = 0.79.  3. Motivations and Goals Variables:  Motives index: 12 items measuring motivations to enter into business. Each item had  five categories, from 1 = not important to 5 = very important. Reliability analysis  scale showed high reliability coefficient of the 12 items (/~ = 0.77). A factor analysis  of the 12 questions loaded on three factors as following: the first factor was labeled  achievement motivation and consisted of five items with a factor loading of greater  than 0.55 (achievement, status-prestige, career, money, power). The second factor  was labeled independence motivation and consisted of three items with a factor load-  ing of greater than 0.66 (independence, job satisfaction, opportunity). The third fac-  tor was labeled necessity motivation and consisted of two items with a factor loading  of greater than 0.71 (economic necessity, security).  Goals index: Eight items of importance of possible business goals (fi~ = 0.60). Each  item had five categories from 1 = not important to 5 = very important. The eight  items were profitability, revenues and sales growth, product/service excellence, sur-  vival of the business, image of the business with customers, personal satisfaction of  the owner-manager, contribution to society, and provide high living standard for  the owner.  4. Network affiliation variables: Number of network affiliations used index was devel-  oped, based upon number of types of networks mentioned as used by the respondent  (professional associations, trade associations, women's professional groups, commu-  nity organizations, college alumni groups, social groups-close friends/family, and po-  litical groups). Other measures included membership in women's business associa-  tions, use of advisers, and number of advisers used. The Advisor Index was developed
330 M. LERNER ET AL.  TABLE 2 Descriptive Statistics for Study of Israeli Women Entrepreneurs (n = 217)  Variable Percentage Mean SD  Education level/university 69% 6.2 1.6  Area of university education: man- 32.8%  agement, economic, engineer  Previous entrepreneurial experience 22.3%  Previous managerial occupation 18%  Previous experience in industry 51.6%  Involvement in the start-up 91%  Membership in women's association 76%  Industry: services 58.1%  Industry: retail 19.1%  Industry: manufacturing 22.8%  Age of entrepreneur 50.5 8.5  Marital status: currently married 76.2%  Number of children 91.8% 2.5 1.2  First child's age 19.5 9.1  Father in business 55.0%  Revenues 5.3 3.2  Income (IS) 5701 4823  Number of employees 12.2 24.7  Profitability 73 % 1.3 0.65  Sources of finance: personal 76.4%  on the basis of number and type of advisors mentioned as used by the respondent.  The seven professional kinds of advisors were in the following areas: production and/  or purchasing, market research and sales, bookkeeping and accounting, budgeting  and planning, personnel/labor management, legal personnel, and computer spe-  cialist.  5. Environmental variables were composed of industry variables: services/retail/manu-  facturing, and type of ownership, percent of ownership (0% to 100%).  FINDINGS  Descriptive statistics showed that the average age of the Israeli woman entrepreneur  in this study was 50.5 (SD = 0.6, median = 51, see Table 2). The range of ages of the  entrepreneurs was between 32 and 74, with 53% between 32 and 51. An overwhelming  majority (92.4%) of all respondents were mothers, mostly of two or three children (33%  and 36 %, respectively). Seventy-six percent of the entrepreneurs in the study were mar-  ried (only 9% of them never had been married). Twelve percent were divorced or wid-  owed (3 %). The average ages of the entrepreneurs' children were 19.5 for the first child,  16.5 for the second child, and 14 for the third and fourth. In addition,
19.5 for the first child,  16.5 for the second child, and 14 for the third and fourth. In addition, 55% of the entre-  preneurs in the study were exposed to business socialization during their childhood:  55% of them were daughters of business owners (see Table 2).  A majority of the women entrepreneurs in the study had higher education. Seventy  percent of the sample had more than 12 years of education and 52% had an academic  degree, of whom 27 % held a B.A. and 25 % an M.A. The remaining 30% had high school  education or had studied at an educational college. Of the university-educated entrepre-  neurs, 33% studied economics, management, or engineering, with the rest studying hu-  manities, social sciences, or fine arts. This social science and arts educational back-  ground is characteristic of women business owners, as has been found in the United  States and OECD countries (Brush 1990). The educational background partly explains
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 331  the high concentration of women-owned businesses in the service sectors in the OECD  countries and Israel. Fifty-eight percent of the entrepreneurs in the study were in ser-  vices, 19% in retail, and 23% in manufacturing in Israel.  Whereas 43.6% of the sample had academic occupations before starting up their  businesses and 18% were in managerial positions, 15.7% worked in technical, profes-  sional, and secretarial positions. Nearly 19% worked in other occupations, but only 4%  served as housewives before launching their ventures.  For most of the women entrepreneurs in the sample (77.7%), the current business  was their first venture; only 22.3% had previous experience in starting a business. At  the same time, however, 51.6% had previous experience in their economic sector, the  percentage of those with previous experience being significantly higher in the services.  Most of the entrepreneurs in the sample (85%) were employed before launching  their businesses.  The majority of women entrepreneurs (76.4%) used only their personal savings  as sources of financing their ventures. Of those, 30% needed little financing for launch-  ing their ventures. Only 23.6% used other sources, such as bank loans. Whereas the  women in the sample owned businesses in 34 different locations in Israel, most were  in the Tel Aviv area (28.7%), Jerusalem (11.4%), Haifa (10%), and many other ur-  ban centers.  To examine the question of factors most influencing performance, Pearson correla-  tions were performed on 28 different variables pertaining to the following areas: demo-  graphics, background socialization, human capital, networks, motivations, and industry.  These analyses examined the influence of each of these variables on the following four  performance measures: (1) business profitability, (2) revenues, (3) the entrepreneur's  income, and (4) the number of persons employed by the business.  Based on an examination of the correlations
(4) the number of persons employed by the business.  Based on an examination of the correlations between each of the independent vari-  ables with the performance measures, stepwise multiple-regression analysis was used  to determine the influence of each of the independent or dependent variables. Each  stepwise regression involved all independent variables and examined their influence  on each dependent variable separately. Table 3 presents both the Pearson correlation  coefficients and the beta scores of the regression analysis of the variables that have a  significant impact on performance in descending order of their influence. Findings of  the analysis of each of the performance measures are discussed below.  Profitability: Membership in women's business associations was the variable first to  enter the equation (r = 0.15, p < .05) (see Table 3). Of the three motivational factors,  economic necessity was significantly correlated with profitability (r = 0.22, p < .05).  In addition, the age of first child, sources of finance, and business skill index also  influenced profitability. Less influential were previous experience, industry sector,  and marital status.  Revenues: Independent variables associated with revenues were involvement in  start-up, business skills, areas of strength, and network affiliation (see Table 3). The  entrepreneur's involvement as a founder was significantly associated with gross reve-  nues (r = 0.36, p < .01), whereas previous experience in the industry was similarly  correlated (r = 0.28,p < .01). Management skills also entered the regression equation  and obtaining finance and budgeting, personnel management, and organizing and  planning skills were highly correlated with revenues. All areas of the planning index  were significantly correlated with revenues. The number of network affiliations of  women entrepreneurs was negatively correlated with revenues (r = -0.23, p < .01 ).
332 M. LERNER ET AL.  TABLE 3 Variables Affecting Profitability, Revenues, Income, and Number of Employees  Variable 13 r  Profitability  1. Membership in women's business associations 0.25 a 0.15 b  2. First child's age 0.21 ° 0.15 b  3. Sources of finance 0.19 b 0.17 c  4. Skills index 0.19 b -  5. Economic necessity motives 0.17 b 0.22 ~  6. Previous employment 0.15 c 0.18 c  7. Manufacturing -0.15 c -  8. Marital status 0.13' 0.18 c  9. Areas of strength -0.10 -  Revenues  1. Involvement in start-up 0.26 a 0.36 b  2. Skills index 0.2P 0.47 b  3. Number of networks -0.17 h -0.23 b  4. Number of advisors 0.14 c 0.37 b  5. Areas of strength 0.14 ¢ 0.36 b  6. Previous experience in industry 0.11 0.28 b  7. Planning index 0.10 0.32 b  8. Services -0.10 -  9. Independence motives -0.10 -  10. Economic necessity motives -0.09 -  11. Membership in women's business associations - -0.23 b  12. Sources of finance - 0.17 c  Income  1. Services 0.22 h 0.21 ~  2. Areas of strength 0.15 b -  3. Economic necessity motives -0.12 -  4. Number of networks -0.11 -  Number of Employees  1. Services 0.44 b -0.37 b  2. Manufacturing 0.36 ° -  3. Number of networks -0.14 C -  4. Involvement in start-up 0.13" 0.26 b  5. Planning index 0.11 0.29 b  6. Number of advisors - 0.29 b  7. Sources of finance - 0.19 a  8. Previous experience in industry - 0.16 °  9. Number of children - 0.16 °  Multiple regression and Pearson correlative coefficients; n = 218.  °p ~< 0.001.  bp ~< 0.01.  ~p ~< 0.05.  Employees: The number of employees was primarily influenced by the industry of  operation, with sector being first to enter the regression equation (see Table 3). The  significant difference in size of the average business ranged from services (four em-  ployees) and retail (eight employees), compared with an average of 36 in manufactur-  ing firms (the standard deviations were 12,16, and 37, respectively). The second more  influential variable was the entrepreneur's involvement in start-up (r =
The second more  influential variable was the entrepreneur's involvement in start-up (r = 0.26,p < .01).  Personal Income: The regression equation for personal income showed one domi-  nant variable, achievement motivation (r = 0.21, p < .05) (see Table 3). Areas of
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 333  TABLE 4 Comparison of Developed and Developing Countries  Theoretical Perspective U.S./Developed Hypothesized Findings  l. Motives/Goals Medium Positive Strongly supported  2. Social Learning Medium Negative Supported  3. Network/Affiliation Medium Positive Strongly supported  4. Human Capital Strong Positive Mixed support  4a. Education level Strong Positive Not supported  4b. Area of education Medium Positive Not supported  4c. Previous entrepreneurial experience Strong Negative Supported  4d. Occupation experience Strong Positive Supported  4e. Skills Strong Positive Supported  5. Environmental Strong Positive Supported  strength in the business and economic necessity motivation also entered the  equation.  The results of these multiple regression analysis indicate that each of the four mea-  sures of performance is influenced by a different group of independent variables. In  other words, there is no evidence that a single cluster of factors equally affects profit-  ability, revenues, income, or number of employees. Findings indicate that the factors  in this study only partially explain variance in each of the performance measures, sug-  gesting that strategic and organizational variables that were not measured will probably  contribute to this unexplained variance.  Two performance measures, revenues and number of employees, are better ex-  plained by independent variables; 39% of the variance is explained in the former, and  31% in the latter. For profitability, the independent variables explain only 15% of the  variance, whereas for income it is only 7%.  HYPOTHESIS TESTING RESULTS  Overall, the perspectives most useful in explaining performance in Israeli women-  owned businesses were motivations and goals, network affiliations, and human capital.  Whereas environmental factors were somewhat useful, social learning theory received  no support.  In addition, certain demographic variables were important in the analyses,
received  no support.  In addition, certain demographic variables were important in the analyses, particu-  larly age of the entrepreneur's children, which was associated with profitability (see Ta-  ble 3). This might suggest that women with older children have more time to devote  to making their businesses successful, whereas a woman with younger children is ex-  pected to first fulfill her family responsibilities consistent with the norms in the Israeli  culture. Relatedly, the average age of women entrepreneurs in this study was substan-  tially older than shown in previous U.S. studies, 50 as opposed to 35-45. This implies  that Israeli women usually do not seek entrepreneurial careers until after their families  are raised. Following is a discussion of the hypothesis testing as these relate to each  theoretical view, with a summary presented in Table 4.  Motivations and Goals  In support of our expectations, motivations and goals had a significant influence on busi-  ness performance. The three groups of motives (achievement, economic necessity, and
334 M. LERNER ET AL.  independence) all were associated with various aspects of performance. Economic ne-  cessity was highly correlated with profitability; achievement was strongly associated  with income; and independence was associated with revenues, although its impact was  negative. These results support our earlier speculations that women entrepreneurs in  Israel may be strongly motivated to achieve high performance as a way of overcoming  structural barriers. Unexpectedly, independence was negatively related to revenues,  possibly because independence as a cultural norm may not be valued as highly in a col-  lectivist society. Overall, H1 was supported.  Social Learning Theory  Findings show no support for Bandura's (1977) social learning theory. Multiple regres-  sion equations indicated that family socialization variable (self-employed father) had  no influence on business performance of Israeli women entrepreneurs. However, it  should be remembered that Bandura's theory was applied to the influence of an entre-  preneurial role model as it related to preference for entrepreneurial behavior (Scherer  et al. 1989). The results support our contention that the small numbers of both self-  employed women and men in Israel may mean fewer role models for Israeli women  entrepreneurs. Hence, H2 was supported.  Network Affiliation  Membership in a women's organization had a highly significant effect on the profitability  of Israeli women-owned businesses. Women belonging to such organizations reported  higher profitability than women who did not. Similarly, the use of a number of advisors  was linked to better performance in terms of higher revenues; however, use of a number  of network affiliations was negatively linked to revenues of the business, personal in-  come, and size in terms of number of employees. These findings support our expecta-  tions about the importance of network affiliations for Israeli women entrepreneurs and  previous research from the
importance of network affiliations for Israeli women entrepreneurs and  previous research from the United States and other countries showing that reliance on  membership in women's organizations is related to performance. H3 was supported.  Human Capital  The impact of human capital factors on performance had mixed results. Contrary to  our expectations and previous U.S. research, education level and areas were not related  to performance. The high level of education of Israeli women in general may actually  equalize their knowledge bases, thereby not adequately distinguishing among better or  worse performers. H4a and H4b were not supported.  The role of previous entrepreneurial experience and experience in the industry pro-  duced different results. Previous start-up experience was not significant, although  involvement in the start-up was significant. This is not surprising given that for 78%  of the sample, this entrepreneurial venture was their first. Similarly, this supports our  expectations that were founded on the small percentage of women involved in entrepre-  neurial endeavors. Therefore H4c was supported.  On the other hand, previous experience was highly correlated with performance,  previous salaried employment with profitability, and previous experience in the industry  with revenues. These results support earlier research by Hisrich and Brush (1991), which
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 335  found that previous experience was associated with business growth. Women in service  sectors showed a higher level of previous experience in their relevant sector than their  colleagues in other sectors (p < .001). These results provide support for H4d.  Consistent with U.S. research, the influence of business skills had an important im-  pact on business performance. The three indexes (business skills, planning, and areas  of strength in business) all had dominant influences on all performance measures, partic-  ularly revenues and profitability. The skills most highly correlated with revenues were  obtaining finance, budgeting, and planning ahead. These results support our thoughts  that Israeli women entrepreneurs would have to rely heavily on business skills to ensure  the success of their ventures. H4e is supported.  Environmental Factors  Environmental influences were associated with employees where number of employees  was differentially associated with type of business; manufacturing with more employees  and services with fewer. Further, manufacturing was associated with profitability, but  the association was negative, perhaps reflecting the difficulties associated with women  getting involved in this sector. Overall, H5 on environmental factors was supported.  These conclusions are summarized in Table 3.  CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS  This systematic investigation of individual factors influencing performance of Israeli  women-owned businesses examined the applicability of five theoretical perspectives.  This research sheds light on the explanatory power of these five perspectives, derived  from studies in OECD countries in a non-OECD country context. Distinct differences  exist in the social structures of Israel and other developed countries (the United States,  Canada, and the United Kingdom) where the majority of research on women entrepre-  neurs has been conducted. This variation in social structures affects the
on women entrepre-  neurs has been conducted. This variation in social structures affects the explanatory  power for the five theories. In particular, research from developed countries showed  that human capital variables, education level and area, previous entrepreneurial experi-  ence, and previous industry experience were all associated with better performance.  However, this study found only mixed support for these variables where the lack of  experience in entrepreneurial endeavors as well a level of education of Israeli women  were not associated with performance. This was due in part to the comparatively late  age of women entrepreneurs at start-up, overall high level of education of women in  general, and high incidence of first venture experience. On the other hand, the impor-  tance of business skills and previous work experience in performance relationships were  similar to research in other countries. Taken together, these findings reflect the differen-  tial effect of human capital variables depending on the country context. Further research  examining the influence of human capital variables in Israeli women-owned businesses  compared with men-owned businesses is now needed.  A second important difference between these findings and earlier research is the  role of motivations. Whereas U.S. research found mixed results with regard to the rela-  tionship between motivations and performance, this study of Israeli women entrepre-  neurs showed that motivations entered all four regression equations and effectively  were related to all four measures of performance. It appears that these findings reflect  the effects of different social structures, particularly the impact of occupational segrega-
336 M. LERNER ET AL.  tion, wage disparity, and participation in the nonsupported sector of the market. To  fully understand the importance of motivations with regard to performance, comparison  of these findings to Israeli men entrepreneurs or women entrepreneurs from other non-  OECD as well as developing countries is needed; this will determine if these results  are gender specific or a function of social structures.  A third area unique to this study is the impact of network affiliation on business  performance. It was surprising that a commitment to a single network was related to  profitability, whereas affiliation with multiple organizations was negatively associated  with both revenues and personal income. This implies that Israeli women entrepreneurs  who strongly connect with an organization will increase profits by building loyal ties,  whereas multiple loose associations or ties may not allow these strong relationships to  develop. Although this study did not examine the process of networking of these entre-  preneurs, clearly the results suggest more investigation is needed. In addition, the extent  to which a single organizational affiliation is related to profitability among Israeli male  entrepreneurs and entrepreneurs in other countries bears further research.  The fact that social learning theory was not significantly related to performance  suggests that this theory is more useful in explaining motives for creation. However,  it is possible that the presence or absence of successful role models (male or female)  may more directly affect performance in countries where there is a greater presence  and encouragement for entrepreneurship.  Despite the structural barriers encountered by Israeli women entrepreneurs, this  study suggests that performance can be improved by having a single strong affiliation  with a women's organization, gaining previous experience in the area of their venture  and learning business skills. Further, achievement motivation
in the area of their venture  and learning business skills. Further, achievement motivation is important to increasing  personal income.  Overall, this research suggests that theories regarding entrepreneurship in particu-  lar, derived from research in OECD countries, need to be carefully examined and tested  before being used in non-OECD and developing country contexts. Social structures,  work, family, and organized social life are particularly likely to affect motivations and  human capital influences on business performance.  REFERENCES  Aldrich, H. 1989. Networking among women entrepreneurs. In O. Hagan, C. Rivchun, and D.  Sexton, eds., Women-Owned Businesses. New York: Praeger, pp. 103-132.  Aldrich, H., and Zimmer, C. 1986. Entrepreneurship through social networks. In D.L. Sexton  and R.W. Smilor, eds., The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger  Publishing Co., pp. 3-23.  Aldrich, H., and Elam, A.B. 1995. Strong ties, weak ties, and strangers: Do women business own-  ers differ from men in their use of networking to obtain assistance? 1995 Working Paper  95-04, University of North Carolina.  Allen, S., and Truman, C., eds. 1993. Women in Business: Perspectives on Women Entrepreneurs.  London: Routledge Press.  Auster, E., and Aldrich, H. 1984. Small business vulnerability, ethnic enclaves, and ethnic enter-  prise. In R. Ward and R. Jenkins, eds., Ethnic Communities in Business. Cambridge Univer-  sity Press.  Azmon, Y., and Izraeli, D.N. 1994. Women in Israel--A sociological overview. In Y. Azmon and  D.N. Izraeli, eds., Women in Israel." Studies of Israeli Society, vol. vi. New Jersey: Transac-  tion Publishing.  Bandura, A. 1977. Social Learning Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 337  Baron, Y., and Biebly, W. 1986. Men and women at work: Sex segregation and statistical discrimi-  nation. American Journal of Sociology 91(4):759  Baum, J.R., Olian, J.D., Erez, M., Schnell, E.R., Smith, K.G., Sims, H.P., Scully, J.S., and Smith,  K.A. 1993. Nationality and work role interactions: A cultural contrast of Israeli and U.S.  entrepreneurs versus managers needs. Journal of Business Venturing 8:499-512.  Belcourt, M., Burke, R.J., and Lee-Gosselin, H. 1991. The glass box: Women business owners  in Canada: Background paper. Ottawa, Ontario: Canadian Advisory Council on the Status  of Women.  Birley, S. 1985. The role of networks in the entrepreneurial process. In Frontiers of Entrepreneur-  ial Research. Cambridge, MA: Babson College, pp. 453-467.  Birley, S., Moss, C., and Saunders, P. 1987. Do women entrepreneurs require different training?  American Journal of Small Business 12(1):27-35.  Bowen, D., and Hisrich, R. 1986. The female entrepreneur: A career development perspective.  Academy of Management Review 11:393-407.  Box, T.M., White, M.A., and Barr, S.H. 1993. A contingency model of new manufacturing firm  performance. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 18(2):31-45.  Brockhaus, R.H., and Horwitz, P.S. 1986. The psychology of the entrepreneur. In D.L. Sexton  and R.W. Smilor, eds. The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger  Publishing Co.  Brophy, D.J. 1989. Financing women-owned entrepreneurial firms. In O. Hagen, C. Rivchun.  and D.L. Sexton, eds. Women-Owned Businesses. New York: Praeger, pp. 55-75.  Bruno, A.V., and Tybjee, T.T. 1982. The environment for entrepreneurship. In C.A. Kent, D.L.  Sexton, and K.H. Vesper, eds. Encyclopedia of Entrepreneurship. Englewood Cliffs, N J:  Prentice-Hall, pp. 288-307.  Brush, C.G. 1990a. Women and enterprise creation. In Enterprising Women. Paris: OECD.  Brush, C.G. 1990b. Research on women business owners: Past trends, a new perspective, and  future
Brush, C.G. 1990b. Research on women business owners: Past trends, a new perspective, and  future directions. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 16(4):5-30.  Brush, C.G., and Hisrich, R.D. 1991. Antecedent influences on women-owned businesses. Journal  of Management Psychology 6(2):9-16.  Brush, C.G., and VanderWerf, P. 1992. A comparison of methods and sources for obtaining esti-  mates of new venture performance. Journal of Business Venturing 7(2):157-170.  Carsrud, A., Gaglio, C.M., and Olin, K. 1986. Entrepreneurs--Mentors, networks, and successful  new venture development: An exploratory study. Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research  1986: 229-235.  Carter, R.B., Van Auken, H.E., and Harms, M.B. 1992. Home-Based businesses in the rural  United States economy: Differences in gender and financing. Entrepreneurship and Re-  gional Development 4:245-257.  Chaganti, R., and Parasuraman, S. 1994. Venture performance: Gender, goals, business strategies,  and management practices. 1994 Working Paper, Rider College.  Churchill, N. 1992. The state of the art of entrepreneurship. In D.L. Sexton and J.D. Kassadra,  eds. The State of the Art of Entrepreneurship. Boston: PWS-Kent.  Cooper, A.C. 1989. Strategic management: New ventures and small businesses. Long Range Plan-  ning 14(5):39-55.  Cooper, A.C., and Gascon, E.J.G. 1992. Entrepreneurs, processes of founding, and new-firm per-  formance. In D.L. Sexton and J.D. Kassadra, eds. The State of the Art of Entrepreneurship.  Boston: PWS-Kent.  Covin, J.G., and Slevin, D.P. 1989. Empirical relationships among strategic posture, environmen-  tal context variables, and new venture performance. In Frontiers of Entrepreneurial Re-  search. Wellesley, MA: Babson College, pp. 370-382.  Cromie, S., and Birley, S. 1992. Networking by female business owners in Northern Ireland. Jour-  nal of Business Venturing 7:237-251.  Dolinsky, A.L., Caputo, R.K., Pasumaty, K., and Quanzi, H. 1993. The effects of education on
338 M. LERNER ET AL.  business ownership: A longitudinal study of women entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship  Theory and Practice 18(1):43-53.  Edwards, R., Reich, M., and Gordon, D., eds. 1975. Labor Market Segmentation. Lexington,  MA: Heath.  Efroni, L. 1994. Promotion and wages in the public sector: Are women discriminated against?  Jerusalem: Work and Welfare Research Institute, Hebrew University, Research Re-  port (Hebrew).  Enterprising Women--Local Initiatives for Job Creation. 1990. Paris, France: Organization for  Economic Cooperation and Development.  Epstein, T.S. 1993. Female petty entrepreneurs and their multiple roles. In S. Allen and C. Tru-  man, eds., Women in Business: Perspectives on Women Entrepreneurs. London: Routledge  Press, pp. 14-27.  Fay, M., and Williams, L. 1993. Gender bias and the availability of business loans. Journal of  Business Venturing 8(4):363-376.  Gibb, A.A. 1988. Stimulating Entrepreneurship and New Business Development. Geneva, Switzer-  land: Branch Training Development, International Labor Office Management Devel-  opment.  Gould, S., and Parzen, J. 1990. In Enterprising Women. Paris, France: OECD.  Hakim, C. 1995. Five feminist myths about women's employment. British Journal of Sociol-  ogy 46(2):279-301.  Hisrich, R., and Brush, C.G. 1982. The woman entrepreneur as a reflection of type of business. In  Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 1982. Cambridge, MA: Babson College, pp. 54-67.  Hisrich, R. 1986. The woman entrepreneur. In D.L. Sexton and R.W. Smilor, eds., The Art and  Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, pp. 61-81.  Hisrich, R., and Brush, C.G. 1984. The woman entrepreneur: Management skills and business  problems. Journal of Small Business Management 22:31-37.  Hisrich, R., and Brush, C.G. 1985. Women and minority entrepreneurs: A comparative analysis.  In Frontiers of Entrepreneurial Research 1985. Cambridge, MA: Babson College, pp.  566-586.  Hisrich, R., and Brush, C.G. 1987. Women
1985. Cambridge, MA: Babson College, pp.  566-586.  Hisrich, R., and Brush, C.G. 1987. Women entrepreneurs: A longitudinal study. In Frontiers of  Entrepreneurial Research 1987. Cambridge, MA: Babson College, pp. 187-199.  Izraeli, D.N. 1994. Outsiders in the promised land: Women managers in Israel. In N.J. Adler and  D.N. Izraeli, eds., Competitive Frontiers: Women Managers in a Global Economy. Cam-  bridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers, pp. 301-324.  Izraeli, D.N., Friedman, A., and Schrift, R. 1988. The Double Blind: Women in Israel. Tel Aviv,  Israel: Hakibbutz Hameuchad (Hebrew).  Johannisson, B. 1993. To grow or not to grow--On the external growth of small firms. In L.G.  Davies and A.A. Gibb, eds., Recent Research in Entrepreneurship. Avebury, Aldershot:  The Third International EIASM Workshop, pp. 266-285.  Johnson, S., and Storey, D. 1994. Male and female entrepreneurs and their businesses: A compar-  ative study. In S. Allen and C. Truman, eds., Women in Business: Perspectives on Women  Entrepreneurs. London: Routledge Press, pp. 70-85.  Kalleberg, A.L., and Leicht, K.T. 1991. Gender and organizational performance: Determinants  of small business survival and success. Academy of Management Journal 34(1):136-161.  Lerner, M. 1989. Paternalism and entrepreneurship: The emergence of state-made entrepreneurs.  Journal of Behavioral Economics 18(3):149-166.  Lerner, M. 1993. Stratification sources of entrepreneurship recruitment. In Frontiers of Entrepre-  neurship Research 1992. Cambridge, MA: Babson College, pp. 75-88.  Malveaux, J. 1990. Women in the labor market: The choices women have. In Enterprising Women.  Paris, France: OECD.  Miskin, V., and Rose, J. 1990. Women entrepreneurs: Factors related to success. In Frontiers  of Entrepreneurship Research 1990. Cambridge, MA: Babson College, pp. 27-38.
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 339  Morrison, A.M., et al. 1987. Breaking the Glass Ceiling: Can Women Reach the Top of America's  Largest Corporations? Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.  OECD Newsletter. 1993, The Rise of Women Entrepreneurs.  Peterson, R,, and Ronstadt, R. 1987. Developing Your Entrepreneurial Know-How. University  of Western Ontario, London, Ontario: National Center for Management Research and De-  velopment.  Ronstadt, R. 1988. The corridor principle. Journal of Business Venturing 3(3):31-40.  Scherer, R.F., Adams, J.S., Carley, S.S., and Wiebe, F.A. 1989a. Role model performance effects  on development of entrepreneurial career preference. Entrepreneurship Theory and Prac-  tice 53-71.  Scherer, R.F., Adams, J.S., and Wiebe, F.A. 1989b. Developing entrepreneurial behaviors: A  social learning theory perspective. Journal of Organizational Change Management  2(3):16-27.  Schwenk, C.R., and Shrader, C.B. 1993. Effects of formal strategic planning on financial perfor-  mance in small firms: A meta-analysis. Entrepreneurship Theorv and Practice 17(3):53-64.  Sekarun, U.. and Leong, F.T. 1992. Women Power: Managing in Times of Demographic Turbu-  lence. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.  Semyonov, M., and Kraus, V. 1993. Gender, ethnicity, and income inequalities: The Israeli experi-  ence. International Journal of Comparative Sociology 24(34):258-272.  Sexton, D.L. 1989. Research on women business owners. In O. Hagen, C. Rivchun. and D.L.  Sexton, eds., Women-Owned Business. New York: Praeger.  Sexton, D.L., and Bowman-Upton, N. 1990. Female and male entrepreneurs: Psychological char-  acteristics and their role in gender-based discrimination..lournal of Business Venturing  5(1 ):29-36.  Sexton, D.L., and Kassadra, J.D. 1992. The State of the Art of Entrepreneurship. Boston. MA:  PWS-Kent.  Shenhav, Y., and Haberfeld, Y. 1994. Discrimination processes in an internal labour market. In  Y. Azmon and D.N. Izraeli, eds., Women in Israel. New Brunswick:
in an internal labour market. In  Y. Azmon and D.N. Izraeli, eds., Women in Israel. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishing.  Srinivasan, R., Woo, C.Y., and Cooper, A.C. 1994. Performance determinants for male and fe-  male entrepreneurs. In Babson Entrepreneurship Research Conference 1994. Cambridge,  MA: Babson College.  Statistical Abstract of Israel. 1992.43. Jerusalem, Israel: Central Bureau of Statistics.  Stevenson, L. 1986. Against all odds: The entrepreneurship of women. Journal of Small Business  Management 24(4):30-36.  Timmons, J.A. 1982. New venture creation: Models and methodologies. In C.A. Kent, D.L. Sex-  ton, and K.H. Vesper, eds., Encyclopedia ofEntrepreneurship. Englewood Cliffs, N J: Pren-  tice-Hall, pp. 126-139.  Turner, C. 1993. Women's business in Europe: EEC initiatives. In S. Allen and C. Truman. eds.,  Women in Business: Perspectives on Women Entrepreneurs. London: Routledge Press,  pp. 133-147.  Vesper, K.H. 1980. New Venture Strategies. Englewood Cliffs, N J: Prentice-Hall.
ELSEVIER  ISRAELI WOMEN  ENTREPRENEURS:  AN EXAMINATION OF  FACTORS AFFECTING  PERFORMANCE  MIRI LERNER  University £[ Tel A viv  CANDIDA BRUSH  Boston University  ROBERT HISRICH  Case Western Reserve University  This article examines individual factors influencing performance of 200 Is-  EXECUTIVE raeli women-owned businesses. Whereas research on women entrepreneurs  SUMMARY is extensive in developed countries', especially in the United States and Eu-  rope, there are comparatively few studies of performance of women-owned  businesses in non-OECD countries. There is evidence that social structures  (work, family, and organized social life) vary among developed and devel-  oping countries as these relate to women entrepreneurs. However, these differences have not been consid-  ered as they may relate to theories explaining performance of women-owned businesses. The extent to  which existing theories are useful in the context of non-OECD countries is of increasing importance as  women in these countries are assuming a greater role in enterprise creation and economic deveh)pment  as a result of radical geopolitical and economic policy changes worldwide.  In Israel, women suffer from occupational segregation and typically earn less money than their  male counterparts, despite a generally high level of education. Entrepreneurship offers a vehicle for Israeli  women to achieve economic parity. Approximately 5.1% of Israeli women are self-employed (compared  with 15 % of lsraeli men) of the 816,800 Israeli working women. This study is the first systematic investiga-  tion of performance variation among Israeli women entrepreneurs, thereby contributing to our under-  standing of women's entrepreneurship in non-OECD countries.  Address correspondence to Robert D. Hisrich, Department of Marketing and Policy Studies, Weatherhead  School of Management, Case Western Reserve University, Enterprise Hall, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH  44106-7235.  Journal of Business --- developed countries, it is important to examine the  extent to which these apply in the context of non-OECD countries.  Israel is one such country where women seek self-employment as a means to over-  come occupational segregation and participate in economic development. The small  size of this country, its predominantly strong family orientation, and overall higher edu-  cation level of women reflect social structures that differ from many developed coun-  tries, a Moreover, little is known about performance of Israeli women-owned businesses.  The purpose of this article is to examine effects of individual factors on performance  of Israeli women-owned businesses, compared with what is known about factors influ-  encing performance from OECD countries. Being the first systematic study of Israeli  women entrepreneurs, the research was guided by three questions:  1. Which factors influence the business performance of Israeli women entrepreneurs?  2. Which factors explain any variance in performance of businesses of Israeli  women entrepreneurs?  3. How similar are these explanatory factors to those found in research conducted in  other countries?  These questions are addressed in the following sections, which provide a back-  ground on the impact of social structures on women's entrepreneurship generally, pre-  sent an overview of the Israeli context, and address theoretical perspectives ex-  plaining performance.  According to the World Bank's "World Development Report, 1990," Israel is a less developed country  in the high income category.
University, Enterprise Hall, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH  44106-7235.  Journal of Business Venturing 12, 315-339  © 1997 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.  655 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10010 0883-9026/97/$17.00  PII S0883-9026( 96)00061-4 --- in an internal labour market. In  Y. Azmon and D.N. Izraeli, eds., Women in Israel. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishing.  Srinivasan, R., Woo, C.Y., and Cooper, A.C. 1994. Performance determinants for male and fe-  male entrepreneurs. In Babson Entrepreneurship Research Conference 1994. Cambridge,  MA: Babson College.  Statistical Abstract of Israel. 1992.43. Jerusalem, Israel: Central Bureau of Statistics.  Stevenson, L. 1986. Against all odds: The entrepreneurship of women. Journal of Small Business  Management 24(4):30-36.  Timmons, J.A. 1982. New venture creation: Models and methodologies. In C.A. Kent, D.L. Sex-  ton, and K.H. Vesper, eds., Encyclopedia ofEntrepreneurship. Englewood Cliffs, N J: Pren-  tice-Hall, pp. 126-139.  Turner, C. 1993. Women's business in Europe: EEC initiatives. In S. Allen and C. Truman. eds.,  Women in Business: Perspectives on Women Entrepreneurs. London: Routledge Press,  pp. 133-147.  Vesper, K.H. 1980. New Venture Strategies. Englewood Cliffs, N J: Prentice-Hall.
316 M. LERNER ET AL.  Five theoretical perspectives explain performance: individual motivations and goals; social learning  (entrepreneurial socialization); network affiliation (contacts and membership in organizations); human  capital (level of education, business skills); and environmental influences (location, sectoral participation,  and sociopolitical variables). Each of these perspectives is associated with empirical work showing rela-  tionships between these individual level factors and performance. Three questions directed this study:  (1) Which factors influence the performance of lsraeli women entrepreneurs? (2) Which factors explain  any variance in performance among businesses established by Israeli women entrepreneurs? (3) How  similar are these explanatory factors to those found in other countries?  A sample of 220 Israeli women business-owners responded to a survey instrument originally com-  posed by Hisrich and Brush (1982, 1985) that was translated into Hebrew and adapted to the particular  conditions of the lsraeli population. A majority of the questionnaires was distributed at meetings of profes-  sional associates of women entrepreneurs and returned by mail, but one-fourth was distributed to women  who were not members of any professional association. No significant differences were found between  the respondents who were members or non-members of associations. Reliability testing showed alpha  coefficients of 0.65 and higher for scaled questions, which is acceptable for survey data. Statistical analy-  ses, including Pearsons's correlations and multiple regressions, examined relationships between factors  identified from theoretical perspectives and performance, which was measured by profitability, income,  size (number of employees), and revenues.  Demographic variables were examined, and the age of the woman entrepreneur's children was sig-  nificantly related to profitability (p < .01). The majority of lsraeli women entrepreneurs are --- (1994) exam-  ined financial performance and documented organizational factors as they related  to performance.  Studies of individual factors influencing performance are prevalent, although the  majority of these were carried out in the United States, Canada, and the United King-  dom. Because the purpose of this study is to consider a context where work, family,  and organized social life differ from non-OECD countries, it will focus on individual  level factors as these influence performance. The following discussion is organized ac-  cording to five theoretical perspectives, each of which has a corresponding body of em-  pirical research. These five perspectives are: (1) motivations and goals, (2) social learn-  ing, (3) network affiliation, (4) human capital, (5) environmental factors (see Figure  1). Hypotheses as to the applicability of each view in explaining performance in the  Israeli context are presented.  Motivations and Goals  Psychological motivations such as achievement, independence, and locus of control  have been widely investigated with regard to their influence on business start-up (Brock-  haus and Horwitz 1986). Fewer studies examined their relationship to business perfor-  mance. U.S. research has found that individual motivations and owner/founder goals  are related to performance in women-owned businesses, where opportunity motivation  was related to survival and independence was associated with "no growth" (Hisrich and  Brush 1987). Other studies indicate few significant performance differences related to  male versus female achievement motivation or individual self-esteem. Women reported  lower levels of self-confidence than did males (Miskin and Rose 1990).  Compared with the United States, the occupational segregation and wage disparit-  ies between men and women in Israel are greater. Due to these structural barriers as
nificantly related to profitability (p < .01). The majority of lsraeli women entrepreneurs are married and  became entrepreneurs after their children were grown. This is consistent with the strong family orientation  prevalent in the Israeli culture and the existence of institutional arrangements that support the working  mother model as long as she gives priority to family responsibilities.  Of the five theoretical perspectives, results showed network affiliation, motivation, human capital,  and environmental factors affected different aspects of performance, whereas social learning theory or  existence of a role model had no significant effect on performance outcomes. Network affiliation was  significantly related to profitability (p <.001), and the use of outside advisors also was related to revenue.  In contrast, participation in multiple networks was negatively related to revenue, income, and size of  the business.  Motivations showed a strong relationship to performance. Factor analysis identified three basic  groups of motives: achievement, independence, and economic necessity. Similar to findings in other coun-  tries, achievement motives were highly related to personal income, whereas economic necessity was sig-  nificantly related to both profitability and revenue.  Analyses of human capital variables showed mixed results; education level, areas of study, and pre-  vious entrepreneurial experience had no effect on previous experience. The fact that this population was  highly educated (51% had university degrees) may have impacted on this result. Consistent with prior  research findings, previous experience in the industry had a direct and significant effect on performance  (p <.001). Previous salaried employment and involvement in the creation of a business were significantly  correlated with sales and number of employees. Results also showed that indexes of women entrepreneurs"  business skills (obtainingfinancing, budgeting, labor management, and
of women entrepreneurs"  business skills (obtainingfinancing, budgeting, labor management, and planning ahead) were highly cor-  related with revenues (p < .01). Regression analysis showed the business skill index significantly related  to profitability (p < .01). Environmental factors were significantly related to performance in that the  sectoral affiliation (service versus manufacturing) was related to revenues and employees, but not to  profitability and income.  This study supports previous research from the United States and Europe on women entrepreneurs,  which found that performance is related to previous industry experience, business skills, and achievement  motivation. However, the differential effects of network affiliations was significantly more important for  women entrepreneurs in Israel. Affiliation with a single network was highly related to profitability,  whereas involvement in multiple networks was detrimental to both revenues and the number of employ-  ees. These findings imply that to perform well, Israeli women entrepreneurs should gain related industry  experience, develop business skills, and seek to achieve success. Most importantly, commitment to a single  network for support and advice is better than a loose alignment with many support groups.
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 317  This research has implications for studies of women entrepreneurs in other non-OECD as well as  developing countries. In countries such as Russia or China, anecdotal evidence shows self-employment  offers women an opportunity to improve their economic status as more capitalistic policies are adopted.  The extent to which individual factors found important in this study, such as business skills, motivations,  previous industry experience, and network affiliation, affect performance in these countries is a topic  for future investigation. This study suggests that individual factors affect performance differentially as  a consequence of variations in social structures, work, organized social life, and family. Future research  should explore the extent to which this is the case. Examination of aspects of organizational strategies  and government policies as these influence performance is another topic for future study. © 1997 Else-  vier Science Inc.  INTRODUCTION  Research on women entrepreneurs is extensive in developed countries, especially in  the United States and Canada. These studies comprise a growing body of knowledge  from which theories are emerging and prescriptions for success are derived. However,  studies of women entrepreneurs in non-OECD as well as developing countries are com-  paratively scarce (Allen and Truman 1993). This is a critical omission from our under-  standing of women's entrepreneurship, because the role of women entrepreneurs con-  tributing to modernization of developing economies as well as facilitating enterprise  development in transition economies is of increasing importance (OECD 1993). Fur-  thermore, social structures, work, family, and organized social life (Aldrich 1989) vary  widely in developing countries (Truman and Allen 1993). Because the theories have  emerged primarily from research in developed countries, it is important to examine the  extent to which these apply in the context of
318 M. LERNER ET AL.  IMPACT OF SOCIAL STRUCTURES ON  WOMEN'S ENTREPRENEURSHIP  Sociological theories argue that social structures (workplace, family, and organized so-  cial life) affect women's access to entrepreneurial opportunities and may influence per-  formance (Aldrich 1989). Occupational segregation, underrepresentation in upper level  management positions, and expectations about family roles may restrict women to cer-  tain industrial sectors, as well as affect motivations and goals for their business ventures  (Aldrich 1989). The extent to which women entrepreneurs face structural barriers in  these areas will arguably have an impact on the performance of their ventures.  The degree to which these structural dimensions affect women entrepreneurs  depends greatly on the country context. In particular, the perceived acceptability of  women's participation in entrepreneurship varies from country to country, relative  to the expectations and cultural norms for women in that society. For example, in  South America belief in "male machismo" and expectations that women's primary re-  sponsibilities are childcare and domestic duties creates a barrier to venture creation  and subsequent venture performance (Sekarun and Leong 1992). Relatedly, in Muslim  countries women are subject to dishonoring their husbands by taking on entre-  preneurial roles (Epstein 1993). In the Philippines, women's movement into high level  management positions is impeded by expectations that women must marry and have  a family, effectively limiting the type of work experience women are able to obtain prior  to self-employment (Epstein 1993). In transition economies, such as Hungary, lack of  child care and unavailability of training in basic business skills are even greater obstacles  for women entrepreneurs (OECD 1993). In Eastern European countries, women have  low levels of education and technical knowledge, which further restricts the ability of  women to succeed in their
and technical knowledge, which further restricts the ability of  women to succeed in their entrepreneurial endeavors (OECD 1993). Research also re-  veals that women starting new ventures are frequently hindered by a lack of business  information, advice, and access to networks and business support systems (Allen and  Truman 1993).  It is important to note that public policy initiatives designed to increase wom-  en's access to information, skill improvement, and funding (OECD 1993; Allen and  Truman 1993) are underway in many developing countries. Still, the relative impact  of the effect of social structures in non-OECD and developing countries differs from  that in the United States and Canada where more than 30% of all small companies are  women-owned, social networks and support systems are well developed, and women  have equal access to entrepreneurial training and information resources (OECD 1993;  Brush 1991). Further, women from some OECD countries are increasingly accepted  as equals in their entrepreneurial endeavors, making it easier for their businesses to  succeed and grow.  These differences in social structures across developed and developing countries  suggest variation in individual factors affecting performance of women-owned busi-  nesses. To date, studies examining the performance of women-owned businesses in non-  OECD and developing countries are very limited. Furthermore, the theories explaining  performance were based on populations from developed OECD countries that may or  may not be applicable in other country contexts. The extent to which these theories  explain individual effects on performance in one country--Israel--is examined. Israel  is representative of a small non-OECD country where social systems--work, family,  and organized social life--differ from those in other countries.
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 319  TABLE 1 Israeli Employers and Self-Employed  1991 1993  Men Women Men Women  Employers 7 % 1.4 % 7.3 % 1.3 %  Self-Employed 11.6 % 4.3 % 9.3 % 3.8 %  Total 18.6% 5.7% 15.6"/o 5. 1%  THE ISRAELI CONTEXT  The pursuit of careers or even a career orientation for women in Israel has been viewed  negatively by some people (Izraeli 1994). During the 1980s and 1990s, women joined  the labor force in greater numbers, today comprising about 44% of the labor force (Sta-  tistical Abstract of Israel 1994). However, occupational segregation still exists in several  industry sectors. The fact that almost three-quarters of the female labor force is em-  ployed in only three of nine major occupational categories, whereas half is concentrated  in only eight of the 90 occupations (Cohen et al. 1987), is evidence of structural condi-  tions. Israeli women are overrepresented in service industries and in clerical occupa-  tions, and the average income in these occupations is considerably lower than in other  occupations (Izraeli 1978; Semyonov and Kraus 1982). Furthermore, in spite of the  "equal payment" law, several studies indicate that Israeli women in the labor force are  paid less than men working in the same occupation (Efroni 1980). It is estimated that the  hourly income of women employed full-time is about 71% of that of men, with women  receiving a lower rate of return than men on their human capital resources (Efroni 1980;  Azmon and Izraeli 1993). Women with the same human capital capabilities as men have  fewer opportunities for advancement within organizations (Shenhav and Haberfeld  1993).  The wage disparity between men and women exists for all occupational categories,  including scientific and academic workers, where average monthly income was 5,463  NIS for men, and 3,090 NIS for women [3 NIS (Israeli shekels) = U.S. $1]. Although  the number of weekly hours men work is slightly greater, in professional and technical  jobs the gap is --- number of weekly hours men work is slightly greater, in professional and technical  jobs the gap is similar (4,392 NIS for men versus 2,541 for women), whereas in adminis-  trative and managerial categories the disparity is 7,321 NIS for men versus 4,862 for  women (Special Statistical Report No. 2963 1994). Although a recent law was enacted  specifying equal opportunity in employment, it has had little impact on prevailing pat-  terns of recruitment, job allocation, promotion, and reward, thereby retaining the gen-  der earnings gap (Azmon and Izraeli 1993).  Sectoral differences between men and women carry over into business ownership.  Entrepreneurship in service and retail are viewed as part of the nonsponsored segment  of the labor market (Lerner 1989, 1991), which means there is absence of government  support in areas of loans or grants. Most women-owned businesses are typically retail  or service, falling into the nonsponsored segment of the market.  Because of these differential opportunity structures for employment in salaried  jobs, turning to self-employment could be a means for women to overcome these struc-  tural barriers. However, statistics show that the average percentage of Israeli women  in self-employment has remained stable and comparatively low during recent years, as  indicated in Table 1.  This level of self-employment is lower than nearly all OECD countries where even
320 M. LERNER ET AL.  Greece and Turkey reported rates of 17.9% and 6.3%, respectively, for self-employed  women (Labor Force Statistics, OECD 1990). It appears that the proportion of female  business ownership in Israel will remain stable in the future. One possible cause for  this is the existence of other barriers in the areas of family and organized social life.  Israel is a family-centered society. In 1991, over 95% of all women over 40 were  married and had an average of 2.8 children per family (Izraeli 1994). Although both  men and women value family life, greater and less flexible time demands are made on  women. This encourages women to seek less demanding career paths where work hours  are shorter (Izraeli 1994). Furthermore, women still feel a primary responsibility for  family with organizations typically employing women who support this belief. In select-  ing jobs, women attribute great importance to "convenience"--namely, the extent to  which the job can be accommodated to family life (Azmon and Izraeli 1993). Conse-  quently, there is a general lack of support for women to be involved in management  and administrative endeavors (Izraeli 1994) as well as self-employment.  The fact that few women occupy upper managerial and administrative positions  influences the scope of management connections they are able to develop. However,  women are highly educated and well trained, comprising 50% of all university students  including business administration (Izraeli 1994). In Israel, the influence of the military  is prevalent in every area of public and private life. Women with military careers fre-  quently have better access to networks, both business and government, than those who  do not. Yet most women have limited access to government and business contacts (Iz-  raeli 1994), which limits women's abilities to obtain information and resources necessary  for business creation and growth. There is evidence that networks and social groups  supporting
for business creation and growth. There is evidence that networks and social groups  supporting self-employed women are emerging, and research shows that Israeli women  have stronger needs for affiliation due to greater emphasis on communitarian values  than in the United States (Baum et al. 1993).  It is clear that Israeli women entrepreneurs must overcome structural barriers in  the creation of their businesses, making the question of their businesses' performance  of even greater importance. The theories addressing individual factors explaining per-  formance of women-owned businesses follows.  PERFORMANCE IN WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESS:  THEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND FRAMEWORK  The most comprehensive summary of individual factors influencing performance was  noted in a recent literature review by Cooper and Gascon (1992), which examined such  factors as experience, education, occupation of parents, gender, race, age, and entrepre-  neur's goals. This summary, drawn from previous literature examining performance  (Stevenson and Jarillo 1990; Vesper 1990; Gartner 1985; Cooper 1981), concluded that  successful ventures are more often started by men who are achievement motivated,  manage risk, and engage in systematic planning. Although Cooper and Gascon (1992)  cogently summarized the state of research on the topic to date, their discussion of inde-  pendent variables is not organized according to particular theories or approaches.  Studies of performance of women entrepreneurs are few (Brush 1992), with the  majority of research not being comparative among groups of women and men. However,  individual level variables explaining performance in U.S. studies were frequently the  same as those noted in male-owned businesses: previous occupational experience, busi-
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 321  ness skills, level of education, and personal factors such as motivations and having a  mentor. The largest comparative study in the United States was conducted by Kalleberg  and Leicht (1991) who examined the determinants of survival and success among small  businesses headed by men and women, using longitudinal data. They found that wom-  en's businesses were no more likely to fail and were just as successful as men's, which  was contrary to conventional wisdom regarding women's inferiority in entrepreneur-  ship. This research also found that the determinants of survival and success operated  in much the same way for men and women "suggesting that the processes underlying  small business performance are similar irrespective of an entrepreneur's gender" (Kal-  leberg and Leicht 1991). These findings were supported in a comparative study con-  ducted by Johnson and Storey (1993) in the United Kingdom, which found no significant  differences in survival rates of male- and female-owned businesses, although women-  owned firms were typically smaller and more likely to employ women. Most recently,  Chaganti and Parasuraman (1994) examined strategic approaches of male and female  entrepreneurs as these related to performance, finding similarities across gender, with  the exception that women tended to emphasize quality more than men.  Although these recent studies add to our understanding of performance similarities  and differences, "performance" in entrepreneurial businesses was operationalized dif-  ferently, making it difficult to compare across studies. Most frequently used operational-  izations of performance include survival, growth in employees, and profitability (Srini-  vasan, Woo, and Cooper 1994). For instance, Kalleberg and Leicht (1991) and Johnson  and Storey (1993) examined survival, whereas Chaganti and Parasuraman (1994) exam-  ined financial performance and documented organizational factors as they related  to
322 M. LERNER ET AL.  I Social Learning Theory "~  Father entrepreneur (y/n) |  Economic status at childhood~  Education level '~ \  Education area ~  Previous occupation  Previous entrepreneurial  experience  Previous employment ~ X  Experience in industry ~  Involvement in start-up "~ \  Business X,  Planning "%1  ~o Areas ofstrengthj ~'~ Business Perfor=nce -~  • Achievement motives Revenues/sales  Independence motives Income • . . D Profitability Econormc necessW motives Goals __ ~. Number of employees  f Networks " ~'~ ~ ~  le Number of networks /  I e Use °fadvis°rs ~'- / I  le Membership in women's ] J /  ~associations I 7 /  ~,,,. Mentors ,,,t/ / /  l" Age I / /  l" Marital status ~ /  l" Number of children ] /  Age of first child j  j-  I* Industry sector  Sources of Finance  FIGURE 1 Model of female business owners' performance.  well as the perceptual barriers that accompany an entrepreneurial career, we might ex-  pect Israeli women entrepreneurs to be motivated by independence and achievement  to ensure solid performance of their businesses. This leads to the following hypothesis:  HI: The influence of motivations and goals will be positively associated with busi-  ness performance. --- 334 M. LERNER ET AL.  independence) all were associated with various aspects of performance. Economic ne-  cessity was highly correlated with profitability; achievement was strongly associated  with income; and independence was associated with revenues, although its impact was  negative. These results support our earlier speculations that women entrepreneurs in  Israel may be strongly motivated to achieve high performance as a way of overcoming  structural barriers. Unexpectedly, independence was negatively related to revenues,  possibly because independence as a cultural norm may not be valued as highly in a col-  lectivist society. Overall, H1 was supported.  Social Learning Theory  Findings show no support for Bandura's (1977) social learning theory. Multiple regres-  sion equations indicated that family socialization variable (self-employed father) had  no influence on business performance of Israeli women entrepreneurs. However, it  should be remembered that Bandura's theory was applied to the influence of an entre-  preneurial role model as it related to preference for entrepreneurial behavior (Scherer  et al. 1989). The results support our contention that the small numbers of both self-  employed women and men in Israel may mean fewer role models for Israeli women  entrepreneurs. Hence, H2 was supported.  Network Affiliation  Membership in a women's organization had a highly significant effect on the profitability  of Israeli women-owned businesses. Women belonging to such organizations reported  higher profitability than women who did not. Similarly, the use of a number of advisors  was linked to better performance in terms of higher revenues; however, use of a number  of network affiliations was negatively linked to revenues of the business, personal in-  come, and size in terms of number of employees. These findings support our expecta-  tions about the importance of network affiliations for Israeli women entrepreneurs and  previous research from the
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 323  Social Learning Theory  A second theoretical approach emphasizes the role of entrepreneurial socialization,  which is anchored in social learning theory (Bandura 1977) as an explanation of entre-  preneurial behavior and career development. Social learning can occur through the ob-  servation of behavior in others, often referred to as role models. The individual's social-  ization process, which occurs in the family setting, transmits social norms, language,  educational aspirations, and shapes career preferences through observational learning  and modeling (Bandura 1977).  The utility of social learning theory to explain entrepreneurial career preferences  was explored in several studies. The effects of observational learning through perceived  parental entrepreneurial role model performance was explored by Scherer et al. (1989).  These authors found that the presence of a parent in an entrepreneurial role was associ-  ated with increased education and training aspirations, task self-efficacy, and expec-  tancy for an entrepreneurial career. The study also showed that individuals with a parent  performing an entrepreneurial role were often high performers and significantly differ-  ent from individuals without role models, who were low performers. Similarly, a Cana-  dian study found that 33% of the women entrepreneurs in this sample reported their  fathers were entrepreneurs (Belcourt, Burke, and LeeoGosselin 1991). One Israeli study  did find a clear link between role models (entrepreneurial fathers) and choice of an  entrepreneurial career by offspring (Lerner 1992). These results support the importance  of entrepreneurial role models in the backgrounds of practicing entrepreneurs identified  in earlier studies (Brockhaus and Horwitz 1986; Hisrich and Brush 1984).  In the Israeli context, a comparatively small percentage of both men and women  are entrepreneurs. The small number of self-employed women suggests women have  fewer
and women  are entrepreneurs. The small number of self-employed women suggests women have  fewer female role models. Because the expectation for women is to choose a career  that is compatible with family life and responsibilities and not to have demanding ca-  reers (Azmon and Izraeli 1994), socialization and norms for women to be entrepreneurs  would be minimal, leading to the following:  H2: The influence of social learning theory will be negatively associated with busi-  ness performance.  Network Affiliation  A third perspective views entrepreneurship as embedded in a complex network of social  relationships. Within these networks, entrepreneurship is facilitated or constrained by  linkages between aspiring entrepreneurs, resources, and opportunities (Aldrich and  Zimmer 1986). According to this view, the presence or absence of networks, such as  access or membership in associations, play a role in influencing performance. The fact  that women entrepreneurs are embedded in different personal and social networks than  men, and that divisions and barriers limit the reach and diversity of their networks~ might  have far-reaching consequences for business performance (Aldrich 1989).  The importance of support systems, mentors, and advisors has been documented  in earlier research. In particular, business associates and friends were identified as being  important to moral support, whereas participation in trade associations and women's  groups was related to business guidance (Hisrich and Brush 1987). Some researchers
324 M. LERNER ET AL.  have stated that access to information and assistance depends on "know-who" (Peterson  and Ronstadt 1987), others arguing that the "old boys" network can be difficult for  women to penetrate (Belcourt et al. 1991). Johannisson (1991) argues that the personal  network of the entrepreneur is the most important resource of the firm. The significance  of personal contacts as an aid to business development has been validated, with a study  showing that strong ties in social networks facilitate the start-up process (Aldrich et  al. 1987). Research from Northern Ireland found women's networks as diverse as men's  (Cromie and Birley 1992). These findings were supported in the United States by Ald-  rich and Elam (1995).  There is evidence that the composition of women's networks is different than men's  (Aldrich et al. 1987), and in many countries women are often excluded from social net-  works or informal networks of information (Brush 1990). One Canadian study assessing  whether women entrepreneurs were creating an old girl's network through business as-  sociations found that although the respondents felt belonging to business groups was  important, they did not often join due to lack of time (Belcourt et al. 1991). These re-  searchers felt that this infrequent use of assistance sources represented a "lost opportu-  nity to break through the isolation of the glass box." Limited use of mentors by women  was found to be a significant inhibitor to successful business development (Carsrud et  al. 1986).  In Israel it was noted earlier that occupational segregation in terms of sectors and  level of managerial responsibility is prevalent. This implies that women will less often  be integrated into certain networks, for instance in the manufacturing, government, or  military sectors. The recent growth of women's associations in Israel suggests women  entrepreneurs might be likely to participate in women-only associations as a means to  gain moral
entrepreneurs might be likely to participate in women-only associations as a means to  gain moral support. Research shows that in collectivist and informal societies like Isra-  el's, success is dependent on personal contacts and relationships with key individuals  who facilitate the start-up (Baum et al. 1993). This leads to the following:  H3: The influence of network affiliation will be positively associated with busi-  ness performance.  Human Capital  The human capital perspective proposes that level of education, area of education, pre-  vious entrepreneurial experience, previous business experience, and business skills will  influence business performance. Cooper (1981) proposed experience and education  were "antecedents" to the decisions to start a company and ultimately affected per-  formance.  Several studies showed that years of formal education of the entrepreneur before  establishing a new firm were related to eventual performance of the firm (Box, White,  and Barr 1993; Brush and Hisrich 1991). Box et al. (1993) also found a relationship be-  tween higher levels of education and increased performance among manufacturing  firms in Oklahoma. Testing the effects of education on business ownership in a longitu-  dinal study, Dolinsky et al. (1993) reported that the levels of staying and reentering a  business increased with higher levels of education. They argued that less educated  women may face financial or human capital constraints that limited their business  pursuits.  Because women in Israel are generally well educated, compared with women in
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 325  many developing countries, it would follow that women entrepreneurs also would be  well educated. Based on the research from developed countries, it is expected that a  high level of education would be associated with better performance, leading to the fol-  lowing:  H4a: The influence of a high level of education will be positively associated with busi-  ness performance.  Hisrich (1986) stated that the high number of service-oriented businesses (over 90%  of the businesses begun by women) reflected the educational focus of women entrepre-  neurs, which generally consisted of a liberal arts college education. This social sciences  or liberal arts educational background might restrict or discourage them from starting  ventures in manufacturing, finance, or technology (Birley et al. 1987; Brush 1990). Statis-  tics in OECD countries indicate that the great majority of women-owned businesses  are concentrated in retail trade and service sectors, which are perceived traditional areas  of female employment (Brush 1990).  Although Israeli women have equal access to every course of study and between  40% and 50% of academic concentrations are composed of women, women in fact are  underrepresented in engineering and management. This equal access implies that  women would be as likely to have degrees in engineering or management as men, lead-  ing to the following:  H4b: The influence of area of education will be positively associated with busi-  ness performance.  The influence of previous entrepreneurial experience upon the success of small busi-  nesses was tested in several studies. Ronstadt (1988) found that longer, more successful  entrepreneurial careers were a function of earlier career starts and involvement in multi-  ple ventures. Prior start-ups and years of entrepreneurial experience were significantly  correlated with performance in a study of 300 manufacturing firms in Tulsa (Box et  al. 1993). On the other hand, Miskin and
in a study of 300 manufacturing firms in Tulsa (Box et  al. 1993). On the other hand, Miskin and Rose (1990) found that previous ownership  experience was not significantly related to profitability of the women in their sample,  but it was significant for males.  The overall small percentage of self-employed women (5.3%) suggests that the ma-  jority of Israeli women entrepreneurs will not have previous start-up experience. This  lack of start-up experience suggests that:  tt4c: The influence of previous start-up experience will have no association with busi-  ness performance.  Many studies of women entrepreneurs find women start ventures in sectors where they  have little experience. Forty percent of women entrepreneurs in a Canadian study re-  ported they had not worked in a related field prior to venture creation. This lack of  experience in a related field was correlated with significantly lower profits (Belcourt  et al. 1991). On the other hand, Hisrich and Brush (1984) found that a majority of their  sample of 468 women entrepreneurs (64%) tended to start businesses in fields where  they had related experience. In a longitudinal study on this sample 5 years later, Brush  and Hisrich (1991) found that among the 172 women business owners responding to  the second survey, related experience was associated with business growth. They con-  cluded that the "antecedent influences" of the women entrepreneurs did in fact affect  business survival and growth.
326 M. LERNER ET AL.  Israeli women are typically employed in services and retailing, as they suffer from  occupational and sectoral segregation, implying that previous experience of women en-  trepreneurs would be predominantly in these areas. Statistics show that women business  owners are more frequently located in the nonsponsored segment of the market, which  is typically service related. Therefore, women entrepreneurs would likely have greater  knowledge of the industries of their ventures, as well as competitive aspects important  to success, leading to the following:  H4d: The influence of related occupational experience will be positively related to  business performance.  The importance of business skills, particularly strength in idea generation and deal-  ing with people, was found to be related to performance in Brush and Hisrich's (1991)  longitudinal study. Since business skills are related to stage of business development,  it is argued that women face challenges of learning business skills early in the life cycle  of their business and are therefore less profitable than in later stages when they are  more competent in business skills (Miskin and Rose 1990). Studies investigating busi-  ness planning skills are mixed--some showing business planning skills related to success  and others showing it does not make a difference. Whereas a recent meta-analysis of 14  research studies confirmed a relationship between planning and performance (Schwenk  and Shrader 1993), these studies focused on the organizational level planning processes  rather than the expertise or gender of the individual owner/founder.  Given that a high percentage of Israeli women work and that it is likely they will  be employed in the service sector and start businesses in this area, it is expected they  would have requisite skills needed to succeed in the area of their business. Because the  structural barriers facing Israeli women might make it more difficult for them to obtain
the  structural barriers facing Israeli women might make it more difficult for them to obtain  resources or suppliers, there should be more reliance on individual skills to succeed,  leading to the following:  H4e: The influence of business skills will be positively associated with business per-  formance.  Environmental Influences  Environmental influences presume that factors including the differential structure of  opportunity, location, sectoral activities, and sociopolitical variables (i.e., availability  of government assistance) are critical determinants of performance. Economic mea-  sures of venture profitability, revenues and number of employees are related to environ-  mental economic conditions, such as the market structure, regional opportunities, in-  vestment climate, availability of labor, and other features (Gibb 1988). Similarly,  resource availability, including venture capital, technical labor force, loans, support ser-  vices, and a favorable entrepreneurial subculture are also a major influence on perfor-  mance (Bruno and Tybjee 1982).  Availability of sufficient start-up capital is reported to be one of the most important  environmental factors influencing success and profitability of new ventures (Brophy  1989). A study of 346 entrepreneurs who utilized a Washington SBDC found no signifi-  cant differences between male and female perceptions of access to start-up capital (Mis-  kin and Rose 1990). Relatedly, studies of women's access to bank loans indicate that --- ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 335  found that previous experience was associated with business growth. Women in service  sectors showed a higher level of previous experience in their relevant sector than their  colleagues in other sectors (p < .001). These results provide support for H4d.  Consistent with U.S. research, the influence of business skills had an important im-  pact on business performance. The three indexes (business skills, planning, and areas  of strength in business) all had dominant influences on all performance measures, partic-  ularly revenues and profitability. The skills most highly correlated with revenues were  obtaining finance, budgeting, and planning ahead. These results support our thoughts  that Israeli women entrepreneurs would have to rely heavily on business skills to ensure  the success of their ventures. H4e is supported.  Environmental Factors  Environmental influences were associated with employees where number of employees  was differentially associated with type of business; manufacturing with more employees  and services with fewer. Further, manufacturing was associated with profitability, but  the association was negative, perhaps reflecting the difficulties associated with women  getting involved in this sector. Overall, H5 on environmental factors was supported.  These conclusions are summarized in Table 3.  CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS  This systematic investigation of individual factors influencing performance of Israeli  women-owned businesses examined the applicability of five theoretical perspectives.  This research sheds light on the explanatory power of these five perspectives, derived  from studies in OECD countries in a non-OECD country context. Distinct differences  exist in the social structures of Israel and other developed countries (the United States,  Canada, and the United Kingdom) where the majority of research on women entrepre-  neurs has been conducted. This variation in social structures affects the
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 327  although women are able to obtain outside financing, they faced perceptual barriers  that they were less capable than their male counterparts (Fay and Williams 1993).  Environmental factors differentially affect the type of business and vary by industry  sector. Historically, women-owned businesses have been concentrated in retail sales.  personal, and educational services (Kalleberg and Leicht 1991). The U.S. Small Busi-  ness Administration (1986) reports that in 1982 nearly half of all women entrepreneurs  participated in service industries, and another 30% were in retail trade. A Canadian  survey found that the retail sector tended to be overrepresented by women entrepre-  neurs (Belcourt et al. 1991). Even though both retailing and services generally have  smaller returns and labor intensity, these sectors are generally easy to enter because of  comparatively small capital investments. Companies in the service and trade industries  generally have lower growth rates and profitability and often confront greater competi-  tion (Kalleberg and Leicht 1991).  In the Israeli context, it is expected that women entrepreneurs will be concentrated  in service and retailing. Following previous research, it is expected that sectoral differ-  ences will affect performance, and that the type of business will determine higher or  lower performance, leading to the following:  H5: The influence of environmental factors will differentially affect performance de-  pending on sector of business participation.  Based on these five theoretical perspectives, an integrated model was developed  (see Figure 1). These five perspectives and the demographic variables comprise the indi-  vidual level variables, which are expected to be differentially associated with perfor-  mance. Although it is recognized that the organizational strategies and goals of organi-  zations will also affect performance, these are not the focus of this study.  RESEARCH
of organi-  zations will also affect performance, these are not the focus of this study.  RESEARCH METHODOLOGY  The database for this research was created from a study conducted in Israel, using a  research instrument that was a comprehensive questionnaire originally based on the  one developed by Hisrich and Brush (1982, 1985), translated into Hebrew. and adapted  to the particular conditions of the Israeli market. Whereas many of the same measures  were used, the study did not replicate Hisrich and Brush's work, having many contextual  and sampling differences. A total of 550 women entrepreneurs were surveyed. The sam-  ple was identified from the membership of four major women entrepreneur associations.  Four different associations were sampled to provide greater heterogeneity and decrease  against any possible bias. Most of the questionnaires were distributed at professional  meetings of women entrepreneur associations and returned by mail. The remainder  were mailed to respondents. There were 220 usable responses, yielding a 40% response  rate. Because sampling from women who are members of business associations could  introduce a source of bias, the sample included women who were not members of wom-  en's organizations as well.  To examine the possibility that consistent differences exist between those women  entrepreneurs belonging to one of the women's business organizations and those women  who do not belong to any such organization, t-test analyses were performed for the main  research variables. These tests were done to examine if there was any bias of selection  in choosing the research population. These analyses revealed that no significant differ-  ences existed among the members versus nonmembers (n = 160, 56, respectively); thus,
328 M. LERNER ET AL.  the selection of one-quarter of the research sample from nonmembers did not cause  any systematic bias. However, there were differences in certain business dimensions;  for instance, the numbers of full-time employees--the members employing more full-  time employees (the means are 5 vs. 10, p < .03), and the average business age--  member's businesses were 3-4 years old, whereas the average business of nonmembers  was 5-45 years (p < .03). In addition, more members prepared business plans for their  ventures than did nonmembers (p < .05). Finally, although there were more retail busi-  nesses among the nonmembers than among the members, whose ventures were mostly  in the services (58%), the difference was not significant. In sum, these t-tests show that  the samples were dissimilar across age and size; however, when these differences are  considered in the larger context of entrepreneurial businesses, all of these entrepreneurs  can be considered small and young. It is not expected that a difference of 2 years in  age or five employees will significantly influence the results given the mean for the en-  tire sample.  Variables  The dependent variables for this research were measures of business performance. Per-  formance measures were based on the following four main indicators, previously used  by Brush and Hisrich (1991) and those commonly used in entrepreneurship research  (Brush and VanderWerf 1992).  1. Size of business: number of employees, number of full-time/part-time employees  2. Profitability: Was your business profitable last year? Three categories of answers:  profitable = 1;/not profitable and not losing money -- 2; losing money = 3  3. Gross revenues: 11 categories from 30,000 IS, up to more than 4 mm IS during the  previous year  4. Income: open-ended question regarding the entrepreneur's monthly income at  present  The independent variables were divided into five groups to capture the dimensions of  all theoretical
independent variables were divided into five groups to capture the dimensions of  all theoretical perspectives:  1. Demographic Variables: age, marital status, number and age of children, father in  business, economic status during childhood, length of residence in Israel,  spouse's occupation.  2. Human Capital: education level, education areas, previous occupation, previous sta-  tus at work (employed/self-employed), previous experience in starting up business,  previous experience in industry, involvement in starting up the current business, and  nature of involvement. Business skills variables included management, planning, and  areas of strength:  a. Management Skills Index: six items ( = 0.74). Each item had five categories from  1 = not important to 5 = very important. The six items were: finance-securing  capital, forecasting, budgeting, dealing with people-management, marketing/  sales-market research, idea generation, product innovation, business operations,  production, daily operation, organizing and planning, business strategy, policies.  A factor analysis of all management skills showed four items (finance, human re-  sources, operations, and strategy) loading on factor 1, reliable at ,/~ = 0.74. Pearson  correlation coefficients between the two items in factor 2, marketing and innova- --- of 0.79, 0.36, and 0.53.  Hence, an area of strength index was developed that showed A = 0.79.  3. Motivations and Goals Variables:  Motives index: 12 items measuring motivations to enter into business. Each item had  five categories, from 1 = not important to 5 = very important. Reliability analysis  scale showed high reliability coefficient of the 12 items (/~ = 0.77). A factor analysis  of the 12 questions loaded on three factors as following: the first factor was labeled  achievement motivation and consisted of five items with a factor loading of greater  than 0.55 (achievement, status-prestige, career, money, power). The second factor  was labeled independence motivation and consisted of three items with a factor load-  ing of greater than 0.66 (independence, job satisfaction, opportunity). The third fac-  tor was labeled necessity motivation and consisted of two items with a factor loading  of greater than 0.71 (economic necessity, security).  Goals index: Eight items of importance of possible business goals (fi~ = 0.60). Each  item had five categories from 1 = not important to 5 = very important. The eight  items were profitability, revenues and sales growth, product/service excellence, sur-  vival of the business, image of the business with customers, personal satisfaction of  the owner-manager, contribution to society, and provide high living standard for  the owner.  4. Network affiliation variables: Number of network affiliations used index was devel-  oped, based upon number of types of networks mentioned as used by the respondent  (professional associations, trade associations, women's professional groups, commu-  nity organizations, college alumni groups, social groups-close friends/family, and po-  litical groups). Other measures included membership in women's business associa-  tions, use of advisers, and number of advisers used. The Advisor Index was developed
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 329  tion, was r = 0.36, which was significant. Because only the first factor's coefficient  was high enough to justify including two factors of management skills, it was de-  cided to use a single index of management skills comprising the five categories.  b. Planning Ahead lndex: six items (reliability analysis scale of these items-- -- 0.83)  Each item had five categories ranging from 1 = less than months to 5 = more  than 2 years. The six items were: planning sales, cash flows, add or drop products,  enter new/exit markets, hiring and other staff decisions, expansion of firm's opera-  tions, changes in plant, building, and equipment. These dimensions were consid-  ered in terms of individual capability rather than firm strategy. Factor analysis  of the planning ahead index found four items loading on factor #1 (planning sales,  cash flow, new products, and entry into new markets) with/k = 0.08. Reliability  analysis coefficients of the remaining three items on factor #2 was also ,/~ = 0.08.  As in the case of the business skills, it was decided to use an index including all  of the skills rather than two separate factors. The planning index included six items  and the reliability of this index was ,/~ -- 0.83.  c. Areas of Entrepreneurial Strength in Business Index: 12 items (,/~ = 0.79) Each  item had five categories ranging from 1 = not an area of strength to 5 = area  of major strength. The 12 items were: location of firm, type of plant, equipment,  product/service quality, pricing, customer service, innovation in products, cost  control, employee productivity, marketing and selling, cash and financial manage-  ment, overall quality of management, and human resource management. Areas  of strength items also were factor-analyzed, but this analysis similarly failed to  produce reliable coefficient values, with factor reliabilities of 0.79, 0.36, and 0.53.  Hence, an area of strength index was developed that showed A = 0.79.  3.
330 M. LERNER ET AL.  TABLE 2 Descriptive Statistics for Study of Israeli Women Entrepreneurs (n = 217)  Variable Percentage Mean SD  Education level/university 69% 6.2 1.6  Area of university education: man- 32.8%  agement, economic, engineer  Previous entrepreneurial experience 22.3%  Previous managerial occupation 18%  Previous experience in industry 51.6%  Involvement in the start-up 91%  Membership in women's association 76%  Industry: services 58.1%  Industry: retail 19.1%  Industry: manufacturing 22.8%  Age of entrepreneur 50.5 8.5  Marital status: currently married 76.2%  Number of children 91.8% 2.5 1.2  First child's age 19.5 9.1  Father in business 55.0%  Revenues 5.3 3.2  Income (IS) 5701 4823  Number of employees 12.2 24.7  Profitability 73 % 1.3 0.65  Sources of finance: personal 76.4%  on the basis of number and type of advisors mentioned as used by the respondent.  The seven professional kinds of advisors were in the following areas: production and/  or purchasing, market research and sales, bookkeeping and accounting, budgeting  and planning, personnel/labor management, legal personnel, and computer spe-  cialist.  5. Environmental variables were composed of industry variables: services/retail/manu-  facturing, and type of ownership, percent of ownership (0% to 100%).  FINDINGS  Descriptive statistics showed that the average age of the Israeli woman entrepreneur  in this study was 50.5 (SD = 0.6, median = 51, see Table 2). The range of ages of the  entrepreneurs was between 32 and 74, with 53% between 32 and 51. An overwhelming  majority (92.4%) of all respondents were mothers, mostly of two or three children (33%  and 36 %, respectively). Seventy-six percent of the entrepreneurs in the study were mar-  ried (only 9% of them never had been married). Twelve percent were divorced or wid-  owed (3 %). The average ages of the entrepreneurs' children were 19.5 for the first child,  16.5 for the second child, and 14 for the third and fourth. In addition,
19.5 for the first child,  16.5 for the second child, and 14 for the third and fourth. In addition, 55% of the entre-  preneurs in the study were exposed to business socialization during their childhood:  55% of them were daughters of business owners (see Table 2).  A majority of the women entrepreneurs in the study had higher education. Seventy  percent of the sample had more than 12 years of education and 52% had an academic  degree, of whom 27 % held a B.A. and 25 % an M.A. The remaining 30% had high school  education or had studied at an educational college. Of the university-educated entrepre-  neurs, 33% studied economics, management, or engineering, with the rest studying hu-  manities, social sciences, or fine arts. This social science and arts educational back-  ground is characteristic of women business owners, as has been found in the United  States and OECD countries (Brush 1990). The educational background partly explains
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 331  the high concentration of women-owned businesses in the service sectors in the OECD  countries and Israel. Fifty-eight percent of the entrepreneurs in the study were in ser-  vices, 19% in retail, and 23% in manufacturing in Israel.  Whereas 43.6% of the sample had academic occupations before starting up their  businesses and 18% were in managerial positions, 15.7% worked in technical, profes-  sional, and secretarial positions. Nearly 19% worked in other occupations, but only 4%  served as housewives before launching their ventures.  For most of the women entrepreneurs in the sample (77.7%), the current business  was their first venture; only 22.3% had previous experience in starting a business. At  the same time, however, 51.6% had previous experience in their economic sector, the  percentage of those with previous experience being significantly higher in the services.  Most of the entrepreneurs in the sample (85%) were employed before launching  their businesses.  The majority of women entrepreneurs (76.4%) used only their personal savings  as sources of financing their ventures. Of those, 30% needed little financing for launch-  ing their ventures. Only 23.6% used other sources, such as bank loans. Whereas the  women in the sample owned businesses in 34 different locations in Israel, most were  in the Tel Aviv area (28.7%), Jerusalem (11.4%), Haifa (10%), and many other ur-  ban centers.  To examine the question of factors most influencing performance, Pearson correla-  tions were performed on 28 different variables pertaining to the following areas: demo-  graphics, background socialization, human capital, networks, motivations, and industry.  These analyses examined the influence of each of these variables on the following four  performance measures: (1) business profitability, (2) revenues, (3) the entrepreneur's  income, and (4) the number of persons employed by the business.  Based on an examination of the correlations
(4) the number of persons employed by the business.  Based on an examination of the correlations between each of the independent vari-  ables with the performance measures, stepwise multiple-regression analysis was used  to determine the influence of each of the independent or dependent variables. Each  stepwise regression involved all independent variables and examined their influence  on each dependent variable separately. Table 3 presents both the Pearson correlation  coefficients and the beta scores of the regression analysis of the variables that have a  significant impact on performance in descending order of their influence. Findings of  the analysis of each of the performance measures are discussed below.  Profitability: Membership in women's business associations was the variable first to  enter the equation (r = 0.15, p < .05) (see Table 3). Of the three motivational factors,  economic necessity was significantly correlated with profitability (r = 0.22, p < .05).  In addition, the age of first child, sources of finance, and business skill index also  influenced profitability. Less influential were previous experience, industry sector,  and marital status.  Revenues: Independent variables associated with revenues were involvement in  start-up, business skills, areas of strength, and network affiliation (see Table 3). The  entrepreneur's involvement as a founder was significantly associated with gross reve-  nues (r = 0.36, p < .01), whereas previous experience in the industry was similarly  correlated (r = 0.28,p < .01). Management skills also entered the regression equation  and obtaining finance and budgeting, personnel management, and organizing and  planning skills were highly correlated with revenues. All areas of the planning index  were significantly correlated with revenues. The number of network affiliations of  women entrepreneurs was negatively correlated with revenues (r = -0.23, p < .01 ). --- The second more  influential variable was the entrepreneur's involvement in start-up (r = 0.26,p < .01).  Personal Income: The regression equation for personal income showed one domi-  nant variable, achievement motivation (r = 0.21, p < .05) (see Table 3). Areas of
332 M. LERNER ET AL.  TABLE 3 Variables Affecting Profitability, Revenues, Income, and Number of Employees  Variable 13 r  Profitability  1. Membership in women's business associations 0.25 a 0.15 b  2. First child's age 0.21 ° 0.15 b  3. Sources of finance 0.19 b 0.17 c  4. Skills index 0.19 b -  5. Economic necessity motives 0.17 b 0.22 ~  6. Previous employment 0.15 c 0.18 c  7. Manufacturing -0.15 c -  8. Marital status 0.13' 0.18 c  9. Areas of strength -0.10 -  Revenues  1. Involvement in start-up 0.26 a 0.36 b  2. Skills index 0.2P 0.47 b  3. Number of networks -0.17 h -0.23 b  4. Number of advisors 0.14 c 0.37 b  5. Areas of strength 0.14 ¢ 0.36 b  6. Previous experience in industry 0.11 0.28 b  7. Planning index 0.10 0.32 b  8. Services -0.10 -  9. Independence motives -0.10 -  10. Economic necessity motives -0.09 -  11. Membership in women's business associations - -0.23 b  12. Sources of finance - 0.17 c  Income  1. Services 0.22 h 0.21 ~  2. Areas of strength 0.15 b -  3. Economic necessity motives -0.12 -  4. Number of networks -0.11 -  Number of Employees  1. Services 0.44 b -0.37 b  2. Manufacturing 0.36 ° -  3. Number of networks -0.14 C -  4. Involvement in start-up 0.13" 0.26 b  5. Planning index 0.11 0.29 b  6. Number of advisors - 0.29 b  7. Sources of finance - 0.19 a  8. Previous experience in industry - 0.16 °  9. Number of children - 0.16 °  Multiple regression and Pearson correlative coefficients; n = 218.  °p ~< 0.001.  bp ~< 0.01.  ~p ~< 0.05.  Employees: The number of employees was primarily influenced by the industry of  operation, with sector being first to enter the regression equation (see Table 3). The  significant difference in size of the average business ranged from services (four em-  ployees) and retail (eight employees), compared with an average of 36 in manufactur-  ing firms (the standard deviations were 12,16, and 37, respectively). The second more  influential variable was the entrepreneur's involvement in start-up (r =
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 333  TABLE 4 Comparison of Developed and Developing Countries  Theoretical Perspective U.S./Developed Hypothesized Findings  l. Motives/Goals Medium Positive Strongly supported  2. Social Learning Medium Negative Supported  3. Network/Affiliation Medium Positive Strongly supported  4. Human Capital Strong Positive Mixed support  4a. Education level Strong Positive Not supported  4b. Area of education Medium Positive Not supported  4c. Previous entrepreneurial experience Strong Negative Supported  4d. Occupation experience Strong Positive Supported  4e. Skills Strong Positive Supported  5. Environmental Strong Positive Supported  strength in the business and economic necessity motivation also entered the  equation.  The results of these multiple regression analysis indicate that each of the four mea-  sures of performance is influenced by a different group of independent variables. In  other words, there is no evidence that a single cluster of factors equally affects profit-  ability, revenues, income, or number of employees. Findings indicate that the factors  in this study only partially explain variance in each of the performance measures, sug-  gesting that strategic and organizational variables that were not measured will probably  contribute to this unexplained variance.  Two performance measures, revenues and number of employees, are better ex-  plained by independent variables; 39% of the variance is explained in the former, and  31% in the latter. For profitability, the independent variables explain only 15% of the  variance, whereas for income it is only 7%.  HYPOTHESIS TESTING RESULTS  Overall, the perspectives most useful in explaining performance in Israeli women-  owned businesses were motivations and goals, network affiliations, and human capital.  Whereas environmental factors were somewhat useful, social learning theory received  no support.  In addition, certain demographic variables were important in the analyses,
received  no support.  In addition, certain demographic variables were important in the analyses, particu-  larly age of the entrepreneur's children, which was associated with profitability (see Ta-  ble 3). This might suggest that women with older children have more time to devote  to making their businesses successful, whereas a woman with younger children is ex-  pected to first fulfill her family responsibilities consistent with the norms in the Israeli  culture. Relatedly, the average age of women entrepreneurs in this study was substan-  tially older than shown in previous U.S. studies, 50 as opposed to 35-45. This implies  that Israeli women usually do not seek entrepreneurial careers until after their families  are raised. Following is a discussion of the hypothesis testing as these relate to each  theoretical view, with a summary presented in Table 4.  Motivations and Goals  In support of our expectations, motivations and goals had a significant influence on busi-  ness performance. The three groups of motives (achievement, economic necessity, and
importance of network affiliations for Israeli women entrepreneurs and  previous research from the United States and other countries showing that reliance on  membership in women's organizations is related to performance. H3 was supported.  Human Capital  The impact of human capital factors on performance had mixed results. Contrary to  our expectations and previous U.S. research, education level and areas were not related  to performance. The high level of education of Israeli women in general may actually  equalize their knowledge bases, thereby not adequately distinguishing among better or  worse performers. H4a and H4b were not supported.  The role of previous entrepreneurial experience and experience in the industry pro-  duced different results. Previous start-up experience was not significant, although  involvement in the start-up was significant. This is not surprising given that for 78%  of the sample, this entrepreneurial venture was their first. Similarly, this supports our  expectations that were founded on the small percentage of women involved in entrepre-  neurial endeavors. Therefore H4c was supported.  On the other hand, previous experience was highly correlated with performance,  previous salaried employment with profitability, and previous experience in the industry  with revenues. These results support earlier research by Hisrich and Brush (1991), which
on women entrepre-  neurs has been conducted. This variation in social structures affects the explanatory  power for the five theories. In particular, research from developed countries showed  that human capital variables, education level and area, previous entrepreneurial experi-  ence, and previous industry experience were all associated with better performance.  However, this study found only mixed support for these variables where the lack of  experience in entrepreneurial endeavors as well a level of education of Israeli women  were not associated with performance. This was due in part to the comparatively late  age of women entrepreneurs at start-up, overall high level of education of women in  general, and high incidence of first venture experience. On the other hand, the impor-  tance of business skills and previous work experience in performance relationships were  similar to research in other countries. Taken together, these findings reflect the differen-  tial effect of human capital variables depending on the country context. Further research  examining the influence of human capital variables in Israeli women-owned businesses  compared with men-owned businesses is now needed.  A second important difference between these findings and earlier research is the  role of motivations. Whereas U.S. research found mixed results with regard to the rela-  tionship between motivations and performance, this study of Israeli women entrepre-  neurs showed that motivations entered all four regression equations and effectively  were related to all four measures of performance. It appears that these findings reflect  the effects of different social structures, particularly the impact of occupational segrega-
336 M. LERNER ET AL.  tion, wage disparity, and participation in the nonsupported sector of the market. To  fully understand the importance of motivations with regard to performance, comparison  of these findings to Israeli men entrepreneurs or women entrepreneurs from other non-  OECD as well as developing countries is needed; this will determine if these results  are gender specific or a function of social structures.  A third area unique to this study is the impact of network affiliation on business  performance. It was surprising that a commitment to a single network was related to  profitability, whereas affiliation with multiple organizations was negatively associated  with both revenues and personal income. This implies that Israeli women entrepreneurs  who strongly connect with an organization will increase profits by building loyal ties,  whereas multiple loose associations or ties may not allow these strong relationships to  develop. Although this study did not examine the process of networking of these entre-  preneurs, clearly the results suggest more investigation is needed. In addition, the extent  to which a single organizational affiliation is related to profitability among Israeli male  entrepreneurs and entrepreneurs in other countries bears further research.  The fact that social learning theory was not significantly related to performance  suggests that this theory is more useful in explaining motives for creation. However,  it is possible that the presence or absence of successful role models (male or female)  may more directly affect performance in countries where there is a greater presence  and encouragement for entrepreneurship.  Despite the structural barriers encountered by Israeli women entrepreneurs, this  study suggests that performance can be improved by having a single strong affiliation  with a women's organization, gaining previous experience in the area of their venture  and learning business skills. Further, achievement motivation
in the area of their venture  and learning business skills. Further, achievement motivation is important to increasing  personal income.  Overall, this research suggests that theories regarding entrepreneurship in particu-  lar, derived from research in OECD countries, need to be carefully examined and tested  before being used in non-OECD and developing country contexts. Social structures,  work, family, and organized social life are particularly likely to affect motivations and  human capital influences on business performance.  REFERENCES  Aldrich, H. 1989. Networking among women entrepreneurs. In O. Hagan, C. Rivchun, and D.  Sexton, eds., Women-Owned Businesses. New York: Praeger, pp. 103-132.  Aldrich, H., and Zimmer, C. 1986. Entrepreneurship through social networks. In D.L. Sexton  and R.W. Smilor, eds., The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger  Publishing Co., pp. 3-23.  Aldrich, H., and Elam, A.B. 1995. Strong ties, weak ties, and strangers: Do women business own-  ers differ from men in their use of networking to obtain assistance? 1995 Working Paper  95-04, University of North Carolina.  Allen, S., and Truman, C., eds. 1993. Women in Business: Perspectives on Women Entrepreneurs.  London: Routledge Press.  Auster, E., and Aldrich, H. 1984. Small business vulnerability, ethnic enclaves, and ethnic enter-  prise. In R. Ward and R. Jenkins, eds., Ethnic Communities in Business. Cambridge Univer-  sity Press.  Azmon, Y., and Izraeli, D.N. 1994. Women in Israel--A sociological overview. In Y. Azmon and  D.N. Izraeli, eds., Women in Israel." Studies of Israeli Society, vol. vi. New Jersey: Transac-  tion Publishing.  Bandura, A. 1977. Social Learning Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 337  Baron, Y., and Biebly, W. 1986. Men and women at work: Sex segregation and statistical discrimi-  nation. American Journal of Sociology 91(4):759  Baum, J.R., Olian, J.D., Erez, M., Schnell, E.R., Smith, K.G., Sims, H.P., Scully, J.S., and Smith,  K.A. 1993. Nationality and work role interactions: A cultural contrast of Israeli and U.S.  entrepreneurs versus managers needs. Journal of Business Venturing 8:499-512.  Belcourt, M., Burke, R.J., and Lee-Gosselin, H. 1991. The glass box: Women business owners  in Canada: Background paper. Ottawa, Ontario: Canadian Advisory Council on the Status  of Women.  Birley, S. 1985. The role of networks in the entrepreneurial process. In Frontiers of Entrepreneur-  ial Research. Cambridge, MA: Babson College, pp. 453-467.  Birley, S., Moss, C., and Saunders, P. 1987. Do women entrepreneurs require different training?  American Journal of Small Business 12(1):27-35.  Bowen, D., and Hisrich, R. 1986. The female entrepreneur: A career development perspective.  Academy of Management Review 11:393-407.  Box, T.M., White, M.A., and Barr, S.H. 1993. A contingency model of new manufacturing firm  performance. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 18(2):31-45.  Brockhaus, R.H., and Horwitz, P.S. 1986. The psychology of the entrepreneur. In D.L. Sexton  and R.W. Smilor, eds. The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger  Publishing Co.  Brophy, D.J. 1989. Financing women-owned entrepreneurial firms. In O. Hagen, C. Rivchun.  and D.L. Sexton, eds. Women-Owned Businesses. New York: Praeger, pp. 55-75.  Bruno, A.V., and Tybjee, T.T. 1982. The environment for entrepreneurship. In C.A. Kent, D.L.  Sexton, and K.H. Vesper, eds. Encyclopedia of Entrepreneurship. Englewood Cliffs, N J:  Prentice-Hall, pp. 288-307.  Brush, C.G. 1990a. Women and enterprise creation. In Enterprising Women. Paris: OECD.  Brush, C.G. 1990b. Research on women business owners: Past trends, a new perspective, and  future
Brush, C.G. 1990b. Research on women business owners: Past trends, a new perspective, and  future directions. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 16(4):5-30.  Brush, C.G., and Hisrich, R.D. 1991. Antecedent influences on women-owned businesses. Journal  of Management Psychology 6(2):9-16.  Brush, C.G., and VanderWerf, P. 1992. A comparison of methods and sources for obtaining esti-  mates of new venture performance. Journal of Business Venturing 7(2):157-170.  Carsrud, A., Gaglio, C.M., and Olin, K. 1986. Entrepreneurs--Mentors, networks, and successful  new venture development: An exploratory study. Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research  1986: 229-235.  Carter, R.B., Van Auken, H.E., and Harms, M.B. 1992. Home-Based businesses in the rural  United States economy: Differences in gender and financing. Entrepreneurship and Re-  gional Development 4:245-257.  Chaganti, R., and Parasuraman, S. 1994. Venture performance: Gender, goals, business strategies,  and management practices. 1994 Working Paper, Rider College.  Churchill, N. 1992. The state of the art of entrepreneurship. In D.L. Sexton and J.D. Kassadra,  eds. The State of the Art of Entrepreneurship. Boston: PWS-Kent.  Cooper, A.C. 1989. Strategic management: New ventures and small businesses. Long Range Plan-  ning 14(5):39-55.  Cooper, A.C., and Gascon, E.J.G. 1992. Entrepreneurs, processes of founding, and new-firm per-  formance. In D.L. Sexton and J.D. Kassadra, eds. The State of the Art of Entrepreneurship.  Boston: PWS-Kent.  Covin, J.G., and Slevin, D.P. 1989. Empirical relationships among strategic posture, environmen-  tal context variables, and new venture performance. In Frontiers of Entrepreneurial Re-  search. Wellesley, MA: Babson College, pp. 370-382.  Cromie, S., and Birley, S. 1992. Networking by female business owners in Northern Ireland. Jour-  nal of Business Venturing 7:237-251.  Dolinsky, A.L., Caputo, R.K., Pasumaty, K., and Quanzi, H. 1993. The effects of education on
338 M. LERNER ET AL.  business ownership: A longitudinal study of women entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship  Theory and Practice 18(1):43-53.  Edwards, R., Reich, M., and Gordon, D., eds. 1975. Labor Market Segmentation. Lexington,  MA: Heath.  Efroni, L. 1994. Promotion and wages in the public sector: Are women discriminated against?  Jerusalem: Work and Welfare Research Institute, Hebrew University, Research Re-  port (Hebrew).  Enterprising Women--Local Initiatives for Job Creation. 1990. Paris, France: Organization for  Economic Cooperation and Development.  Epstein, T.S. 1993. Female petty entrepreneurs and their multiple roles. In S. Allen and C. Tru-  man, eds., Women in Business: Perspectives on Women Entrepreneurs. London: Routledge  Press, pp. 14-27.  Fay, M., and Williams, L. 1993. Gender bias and the availability of business loans. Journal of  Business Venturing 8(4):363-376.  Gibb, A.A. 1988. Stimulating Entrepreneurship and New Business Development. Geneva, Switzer-  land: Branch Training Development, International Labor Office Management Devel-  opment.  Gould, S., and Parzen, J. 1990. In Enterprising Women. Paris, France: OECD.  Hakim, C. 1995. Five feminist myths about women's employment. British Journal of Sociol-  ogy 46(2):279-301.  Hisrich, R., and Brush, C.G. 1982. The woman entrepreneur as a reflection of type of business. In  Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 1982. Cambridge, MA: Babson College, pp. 54-67.  Hisrich, R. 1986. The woman entrepreneur. In D.L. Sexton and R.W. Smilor, eds., The Art and  Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, pp. 61-81.  Hisrich, R., and Brush, C.G. 1984. The woman entrepreneur: Management skills and business  problems. Journal of Small Business Management 22:31-37.  Hisrich, R., and Brush, C.G. 1985. Women and minority entrepreneurs: A comparative analysis.  In Frontiers of Entrepreneurial Research 1985. Cambridge, MA: Babson College, pp.  566-586.  Hisrich, R., and Brush, C.G. 1987. Women --- 1985. Cambridge, MA: Babson College, pp.  566-586.  Hisrich, R., and Brush, C.G. 1987. Women entrepreneurs: A longitudinal study. In Frontiers of  Entrepreneurial Research 1987. Cambridge, MA: Babson College, pp. 187-199.  Izraeli, D.N. 1994. Outsiders in the promised land: Women managers in Israel. In N.J. Adler and  D.N. Izraeli, eds., Competitive Frontiers: Women Managers in a Global Economy. Cam-  bridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers, pp. 301-324.  Izraeli, D.N., Friedman, A., and Schrift, R. 1988. The Double Blind: Women in Israel. Tel Aviv,  Israel: Hakibbutz Hameuchad (Hebrew).  Johannisson, B. 1993. To grow or not to grow--On the external growth of small firms. In L.G.  Davies and A.A. Gibb, eds., Recent Research in Entrepreneurship. Avebury, Aldershot:  The Third International EIASM Workshop, pp. 266-285.  Johnson, S., and Storey, D. 1994. Male and female entrepreneurs and their businesses: A compar-  ative study. In S. Allen and C. Truman, eds., Women in Business: Perspectives on Women  Entrepreneurs. London: Routledge Press, pp. 70-85.  Kalleberg, A.L., and Leicht, K.T. 1991. Gender and organizational performance: Determinants  of small business survival and success. Academy of Management Journal 34(1):136-161.  Lerner, M. 1989. Paternalism and entrepreneurship: The emergence of state-made entrepreneurs.  Journal of Behavioral Economics 18(3):149-166.  Lerner, M. 1993. Stratification sources of entrepreneurship recruitment. In Frontiers of Entrepre-  neurship Research 1992. Cambridge, MA: Babson College, pp. 75-88.  Malveaux, J. 1990. Women in the labor market: The choices women have. In Enterprising Women.  Paris, France: OECD.  Miskin, V., and Rose, J. 1990. Women entrepreneurs: Factors related to success. In Frontiers  of Entrepreneurship Research 1990. Cambridge, MA: Babson College, pp. 27-38.
ISRAELI WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 339  Morrison, A.M., et al. 1987. Breaking the Glass Ceiling: Can Women Reach the Top of America's  Largest Corporations? Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.  OECD Newsletter. 1993, The Rise of Women Entrepreneurs.  Peterson, R,, and Ronstadt, R. 1987. Developing Your Entrepreneurial Know-How. University  of Western Ontario, London, Ontario: National Center for Management Research and De-  velopment.  Ronstadt, R. 1988. The corridor principle. Journal of Business Venturing 3(3):31-40.  Scherer, R.F., Adams, J.S., Carley, S.S., and Wiebe, F.A. 1989a. Role model performance effects  on development of entrepreneurial career preference. Entrepreneurship Theory and Prac-  tice 53-71.  Scherer, R.F., Adams, J.S., and Wiebe, F.A. 1989b. Developing entrepreneurial behaviors: A  social learning theory perspective. Journal of Organizational Change Management  2(3):16-27.  Schwenk, C.R., and Shrader, C.B. 1993. Effects of formal strategic planning on financial perfor-  mance in small firms: A meta-analysis. Entrepreneurship Theorv and Practice 17(3):53-64.  Sekarun, U.. and Leong, F.T. 1992. Women Power: Managing in Times of Demographic Turbu-  lence. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.  Semyonov, M., and Kraus, V. 1993. Gender, ethnicity, and income inequalities: The Israeli experi-  ence. International Journal of Comparative Sociology 24(34):258-272.  Sexton, D.L. 1989. Research on women business owners. In O. Hagen, C. Rivchun. and D.L.  Sexton, eds., Women-Owned Business. New York: Praeger.  Sexton, D.L., and Bowman-Upton, N. 1990. Female and male entrepreneurs: Psychological char-  acteristics and their role in gender-based discrimination..lournal of Business Venturing  5(1 ):29-36.  Sexton, D.L., and Kassadra, J.D. 1992. The State of the Art of Entrepreneurship. Boston. MA:  PWS-Kent.  Shenhav, Y., and Haberfeld, Y. 1994. Discrimination processes in an internal labour market. In  Y. Azmon and D.N. Izraeli, eds., Women in Israel. New Brunswick:
En resumen, el estudio sobre mujeres empresarias en Israel examina los factores que influyen en el rendimiento de las empresas propiedad de mujeres en este país. Se destaca que las mujeres emprendedoras en Israel enfrentan desafíos como la segregación ocupacional, la disparidad salarial y la falta de acceso a recursos financieros y redes de apoyo. A pesar de esto, se encontró que la afiliación a redes, la motivación por el logro y las habilidades empresariales son factores clave que influyen en el rendimiento de las empresas propiedad de mujeres en Israel.

El estudio también destaca la importancia de considerar las diferencias culturales y sociales al aplicar teorías de emprendimiento, y sugiere que las motivaciones y el capital humano son factores clave en el rendimiento empresarial. Además, se menciona que las mujeres emprendedoras en Israel tienden a concentrarse en los sectores de servicios y comercio minorista, y que la edad de los hijos de las emprendedoras puede influir en su capacidad para dedicarse a sus negocios.

En general, el estudio proporciona una visión detallada de los factores que influyen en el rendimiento de las mujeres empresarias en Israel, destacando la importancia de la afiliación a redes, las motivaciones y las habilidades empresariales en el éxito de sus empresas. Además, se sugiere que se necesita más investigación para comprender completamente las dinámicas que afectan a las mujeres emprendedoras en este contexto específico.
