A systematic literature review of university technology transfer from a quadruple helix perspective: Towards a research agenda Miller, K., McAdam, R., & McAdam, M. (2016). A systematic literature review of university technology transfer from a quadruple helix perspective: Towards a research agenda. R & D Management . Advance online  publication. https://doi.org/10.1111/radm.12228 Published in: R & D Management Document Version: Peer reviewed version Queen's University Belfast - Research Portal: Link to publication record in Queen's University Belfast Research Portal Publisher rights © 2016 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd This is the peer reviewed version of the following article: Miller, K., McAdam, R. and McAdam, M. (2016), A systematic literature review of university technology transfer from a quadruple helix perspective: toward a research agenda. R&D Management, which has been published in final form at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/wol1/doi/10.1111/radm.12228/abstract. This article may be used for non-commercial purposes in accordance with Wiley Terms and Conditions for Self-Archiving. General rights Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Queen's University Belfast Research Portal is retained by the author(s) and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights. Take down policy The Research Portal is Queen's institutional repository that provides access to Queen's research output. Every effort has been made to ensure that content in the Research Portal does not infringe any person's rights, or applicable UK laws. If you discover content in the Research Portal that you believe breaches copyright or violates any law, please contact openaccess@qub.ac.uk. Open Access This research has been made openly available by Queen's academics and its Open Research team.  We would love to hear how access to this research benefits you. – Share
its Open Research team.  We would love to hear how access to this research benefits you. – Share your feedback with us: http://go.qub.ac.uk/oa-feedback Download date:19. jul. 2024
Forthcoming R&D Management   A Systematic Literature Review of University Technology Transfer from a Quadruple  Helix perspective : Towards a research agenda     Abstract   Within recent years, there has been a rapid expansion of the University’s role in economic  development. This has resulted in University Technology Transfer (UTT) taking place within  an increasingly complex network of regional stakeholders. This complexity has resulted in  quadruple helix models where the triple helix model of academia, industry and regional  government  now includes societal based innovation users  as a fourth helix.  Despite this  development,  extant research is fragmented and lacks coherent frameworks and  conceptualisations which fully depict the dynamic and evolving nature of UTT. Accordingly,  this pape r reviews  Mode 2 UTT from a quadruple helix perspective to identify key themes to   develop a research agenda which reflects progression from a triple into a quadruple helix  ecosystem.    Keywords : Systematic Literature Review ; Quadruple Helix; University Technology Transfer ;  Triple Helix; Technology Commercialisation; End Users     1.0 Introduction   Collaboration between government, academia and industry is considered to be of critical  importance in University Technology Transfer (UTT) in enhancing regional economic and  social development (Klofsten et al., 2010 ; Urbano and Guerrero, 2013); with the interplay  between these three institutional spheres forming the crux of the well -established Triple Helix  Model of UTT (Etzkowitz and Leydesd orff, 2000). However, in recent years, the effectiveness  of this model has been questioned, as regions have failed to meet expected levels of UTT in  terms of innovation, GDP and employment  (Asheim and Coenen, 2005; McAdam et al.,
Forthcoming R&D Management   2012).  In order to address  this challenge , recent policy initiatives identify the need for more  open and co -creational UTT involving societal based innovation user stakeholders leading to a  complex network of quadruple helix stakeholders involved at various stages throughout the  UTT process (Wilson, 2012; RIS, 2014). The inclusion of the fourth helix depicting societal  based innovation users (Leydesdorff, 2011; Carayannis et al., 2012) and the subsequent  emergence of quadruple helix structures reflect Bozeman et al.’s (2015) review demonstrating  the increasing importance placed on  public valued or societal led UTT.     Despite this , current UTT theory lacks coherent frameworks and conceptualisations which fully  depict this evolving nature of quadruple helix theory and resulting structures. Whilst  comprehensive literature reviews have been conducted , to date (Bozeman, 2000; O’Shea et al.,  2005; Djokovic and Souitaris, 2008; Rothaermel et al., 2007) they tend to focus on a particular  aspect of UTT  and fail to fully encapsulate the dynamic and evolving nature of UTT which is  embedded in an increasingly complex network of  stakeholders  innovation -user stakeholders  seeking to influence the development of UTT in addition to that of receiving innovation  outcomes.  In fact, n o reviews to date have explored the impact quadruple helix on UTT.     Given the wide and expanding scope of UTT , it is necessary in the first instance to  define what  is meant by UTT  within criteria based limits to guide th is literature review. Etzkowitz and  Leydesdorff (2000:  118) argue that UTT can defined based on Gibbons et al . (1994) Mode 1  and Mode 2 theory of knowledge production as shown in Figure 1.   [Insert figure 1 here]     Using  Mitev and Venters (2009) and Swan et al .’s (2010) interpretation  in a UTT contex t,  Mode 1 UTT  refers to the traditional  role of Universities  in developing basic research leading
Forthcoming R&D Management   to societal learning and education . Mode 2 UTT, the focus of this paper, refers to Universities ’  newer role in UTT  activities leading to the commercialisation of technology. Building  on this,  Hughes  and Kitson ( 2012 ), Abreu et al . (2009) and Carayannis and Campbell (2009) refer to   idea of Mode 3 which encapsulates  University knowledge exchange involving a wide range of  University – community knowledge exchange including training and development. Mode 2   UTT is distinguishable from traditional research in Universities (Mode 1), due to its relevance  to practice (Starke y and Madan, 2001) or the context of application (Tranfield and Starkey,  1998). Consistent with Gibbons  et al.’s (1994) definition of “ Mode 2” knowledge production  (i.e. Figure 1), Universities are seen as key actors or organisations in national innovation  systems. Within such systems, universities are vehicles for technology transfer and a conduit  through which knowledge exchange is made more effective (Cao et al., 2009). Resultant  entities include, in addition to IP,  licensing, patenting,  spin -out companies and spin -in  companies into university incubators and other technology bridge foundations or  intermediaries (Bercovitz and Feldman, 2006) which support the codification and  commercialisation of knowledge in the university context for commercialisation purposes  (Rademakers, 2005). Further maturation of such entities may result in expansion and growth  leading to relocation in University or Government Science Parks. Throughout the paper we  adopt the term ‘Mode 2 UTT’ as referring to University based Mode 2 knowledge production  through UTT  with a view towards commercialisation.     To enhance coherence between recent policy and practice, the aim of this paper is to critically  review Mode 2 UTT from a quadruple helix perspective and  to identify key themes and future  research agendas. The next section will discuss the systematic literature
key themes and future  research agendas. The next section will discuss the systematic literature review (SLR)  methodology followed. The core findings will then be presented from which four key themes  are delineated. These themes are then synthe sised and future research agendas are suggested.
Forthcoming R&D Management   2.0 Review  Methodology   The methodology incorporated a SLR of double -blind peer -reviewed academic journal articles  relating to the progression of UTT from a relatively closed system, to a triple helix and then on  to a quadruple helix context. The importance of a structured and mu ltiple -stage system for  reviewing a large volume of academic literature is well acknowledged and as a consequence  was deemed appropriate given the aim of this paper (Thorpe et al., 2005; Pittaway and Cope,  2007). The adoption of SLR proved instrumental in developing a robust and holistic collation  of the developments of UTT over the past 34 years (i.e. since the introduction of the Bayh - Dole Act). Details of the Five Stage SLR followed are given below.     Stage 1: Keyword search   Research on Mode 2 UTT is voluminous and multidisciplinary  (Carayannis and Campbell,  2009). Thus, in order to define the boundaries of the subject, recognised  experts in the area  namely academics, technology transfer office staff and  principal investigator s were consulted  to identify suitable keyword search terms.     Since the focus of this paper is Mode 2 UTT from a quadruple helix perspective , it was deemed  appropriate to use all -encompassing search terms to initially review the topic in a holistic  manner rather than taking each stage as an individual component. This approach resulted in  five core search terms deemed valid by the experts consulted, namely “ technology  commercialisation  and universities”, “technology -based entrepreneurship and universities” ,  “academic enterprise and universities”, “Triple Helix and universities”  and “ Quadruple Helix   and universities”.
Forthcoming R&D Management   Stage 2: Database Search   Two distinct academic databa ses were utilised in order to cross -reference the results and  eliminate the risk of disregarding relevant literature. The first search session was conducted  through the ‘ABI/Inform’ database. ABI/Inform  was chosen as the primary database on account  of it o ffering a comprehensive and wide range of academic entrepreneurship and university  commercialisation li terature , in addition to its  frequent use in systematic literature reviews (e.g.  Becheikh et al., 2006; Djokovic and Souitaris, 2008). Once this initial search was completed ,  it was then repeated using ‘Business Source Premier’ database which has also been used  frequently in systemat ic literature reviews is the industry’s most frequently used research  database (e.g. Pittaway et al., 2004; Djokovic and Souitaris, 2008). For each search, the  keywords from Stage 1 were constructed into search strings which included a combination of  an ar ticle title search. In order to be included, the article had to be published in a peer reviewed  journal  between  1980 and 20 15. The sample size at this stage was 957 articles.         Stage 3: Article Scan / Selection   The aim of stage three  was to refine the s ample identified in stage  two to ensure  the inclusion  of the  most relevant articles. This consisted of three steps, the first of which was to eliminate  any overlapping articles between the databases which reduced the sample size to 457 articles.  Second, th e abstracts of these remaining articles were read to determine their relevance given  our research aim. Out of these 457 articles, 162 articles were downloaded, saved and labelled  in a designated folder (labelled according to author and year of publication)  as being potentially  relevant to this literature review . Third, the bibliographical data of each paper was exported  directly into Refworks for potential future  referencing . Table 1 presents the number
exported  directly into Refworks for potential future  referencing . Table 1 presents the number of papers  selected in relation to each  search term.   [Insert  Table 1 here]
Forthcoming R&D Management   Stage 4: Data Extraction   The fourth stage was data extraction. The aim of this stage was to minimize researcher  subjectivity. A standardised data extraction process (Tranfield et al., 2003) by means of a pro - forma form was conducted. The protocol involved recording the journal, author(s), title, year  published, geographical area, research problem/question, theory base, paper type  (descriptive/explanatory/conceptual), methodological approach, data sources, sample type,  sample size, depe ndent variable (quantitative studies only), analysis, key  findings/contributions, any need for further research and a section for recording any additional  comments the reviewer had of the paper. This protocol was carried out for all 1 51 articles which  resulted in a final document of 210 pages (on average 1.5 pages of single spaced data was  extracted for each article). This document provided a raw data repository of the selected  articles.     Stage 5: Data Analysis   The last stage involved importing all the rele vant articles into NVivo 10 to conduct  a process  of open inductive coding (Miles and Huberman, 1994). Each article was opened in turn and  read through NVivo 101. The articles were then coded into free nodes and grouped into tree  nodes (representing open co des and themes/subthemes). To ensure rigor and to increase the  reliability of the coding process, the coding of data was conducted independently by two of the  research  team s with any variances in the codes  discussed until a consensus was achieved. If a  consensus could not be achieved, the third member of the research  team  was consulted.                                                                   1 NVivo 10 is a software tool used to support qualitative and mixed methods research.
Forthcoming R&D Management   3.0 Contextual Background -The emergence of the UTT quadruple helix model.   In order to aid contextualisation of the SLR  and to add meaning to the themes presented in  section 4, a trajectory of UTT spanning 30 years illustrating the antecedents which lead to the  emergence the UTT quadruple helix model is presented in Figure 2.   [Insert F igure 2 here]   It is clear from the SLR that over the past three decades, collaboration between university,  government and industry has evolved considerably (Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff, 2000; Miller  et al., 2014). This evolution is in part due to a combination of globalisation and regionalisa tion  in economic development (McAdam et al., 2012) with increased pressure from government on  universities to take a more proactive role in regional and societal development (Rothaermel et  al., 2007; Grimaldi et al., 2011). It is evident that the UTT Tripl e Helix Model is essentially an  innovation -push model where innovation is seen as originating in academia, for example from  technology disclosure, leading to the development of technology ( Bercovitz and Feldman,  2006; Etzo kowitz and Klofsten, 2005 ) aided b y Government funding support and Industry  (private sector) investment. Resultant entities such as spin out companies then seek out  potential markets and customers for the technology -based products thus creating the innovation  push effect within the Triple Helix model as identified by Gunasekara (2006). However, this  innovation push model of Mode 2 UTT has been increasingly critiqued as failing to produce  expected results in terms of increased innovation, GDP and job creation due to its lack of  societal base d innovation -user involvement (Asheim and Coenen, 2005; Edvardsson et al.,  2011; McAdam et al, 2012). Furthermore, Scholtes, (2013) and Prajapati et al., (2013)  refer to  the excessive development costs and cycle times due to the closed nature of the proces s. h
Forthcoming R&D Management   In acknowledgment  of this, studies from the mid 2000’s onwards refer to the increased  pressure  from government on Universities to seek and secure funding from non -Government sources  leading to a heightened focus on Mode 2 UTT as a revenue stream for U niversities (Lipinski  et al., 2013). This required and subsequently resulted in closer interaction with regional  stakeholders. Whilst the role of an ‘extended peer user community’ in technology  commercialisation for disciplines such as biotechnology and na notechnology has been noted  since the early 2000’s (Ivanova, 2014), it was not until 2009 that Carayannis and Campbell  posited a quadruple helix innovation system, with “societal based innovation users” more fully  integrated into the innovation processes a s both innovation users and as influencing the Mode  2 UTT process at all stages of development. The inclusion of the fourth helix reflects the  development and increasing complexity and change of modern economic systems which  suggests that the triple helix is not sufficient to ensure long term sustainable growth  (MacGregor et al., 2010; Ivanova, 2014). Figure 3 presents the transition from triple to  quadruple helix structures.    [Insert figure 3 here]   The inclusion of this fourth helix challenges Mode 2 UTT in a number of ways. First, societal  based innovation users are seen as potentially being involved in a co -creational manner  throughout the Mode 2 UTT process rather than simply being passive end recipients  (Edvardsson et al., 2011; Chesbrough, 2011). Thus , they create an innovation -pull effect within  UTT. Second, they are defined also as stakeholders reflecting their committed involvement and  mutual influence and participation throughout the UTT process. Third, they are representative  of societal need and thus can increase the relevance of UTT and a University within a regional  setting (Carayannis et al., 2012; Chesbrough, 2007 and 2010; Miller et al,
within a regional  setting (Carayannis et al., 2012; Chesbrough, 2007 and 2010; Miller et al, 2014). Fourth, the  user involvement suggests an open innovation approach where knowledge from multiple
Forthcoming R&D Management   stakeholders is exchanged throughout the UTT process rather than the more closed Triple Helix  approach (Johnston et al., 2010). Kenney and Mowery (2014), Arnkil et al., (2010) and Cooke  (2005) suggest that from an Open Innovation perspective, the normative and  primarily closed  innovation Triple Helix -based knowledge transfer process adds to internalisation rather than  exploring more diverse forms of knowledge as sources of innovation (Cooke, 2005;   Carayannis and Rakhmatullin, 2014). Fifth, the closed innovatio n approach to UTT  commercialisation is becoming prohibitively expensive and hence knowledge from societal  based innovation user stakeholders becomes more attractive (Savva and Scholtes, 2013)  leading to potentially shorter development cycle times (Prajapat i et. al., 2013).   2009 onwards witnessed  an increasing number of articles exploring the emergence of the  quadruple helix however these  articles largely undertake a macro perspective which  emphasises that the quadruple helix is an agenda largely driven from the top down with limited  research exploring the impact of quadruple helix structures on the Mode 2 UTT process. For  example, Schoonm aker and Carayannis’s (2013) study identify that most universities operating  within a regional network appear to be still operating within triple helix structures despite  national government innovation policy stressing the need to develop collaborative ent ities with  societal based innovation users to produce more market relevant technology based products.  However, it was noted that a small minority of firms show signs of operating within quadruple  helix structures identifying a filtering down to Mode 2 UTT process levels. A study by  MacGregor et al., (2010) looked at the Quadruple Helix readiness of 16 European cities and  identifies that challenges lie at both a regional and sector level. Science -based industry sectors  were identified as ‘quadruple helix rea dy’ due
and sector level. Science -based industry sectors  were identified as ‘quadruple helix rea dy’ due to their research departments and absorptive  capacity which aid the bridging of basic research from universities (Mode 1) into their  innovation processes (Mode 2). However, it was identified that regions with a dominance of  companies in less techno logy intensive areas often innovate in -house in a closed manner and
Forthcoming R&D Management   are less likely to have the required absorptive capacity or motivation to collaborate with  universities. Carayannis and Rakhmaullin (2014) identify that variances across regions  promotes q uadruple helix structures where there is a need to formulate smart specialisation  platforms in order to promote engagement between institutions to build on regional strengths.  In this context, Smart Specialisation refers to regions within Europe specialisi ng in specific  technologies that have regional relevance and hence exerts an innovation pull influence on the  Mode 2 UTT process consistent with the Quadruple Helix model. In sum, it is evident that  despite the limited studies exploring quadruple helix to date, it is emergent in nature which is  going to have profound effects on Mode 2 UTT and raises challenges which need to be  identified and addressed to aid its development. Overall , Schuurman et al., (2012); Ivanova,  (2014); Arnkil et al., (2010) and Caray annis and Rakhmatulin (2014)  suggest the emergence  of the quadruple helix model challenges the approach to UTT and Mode 2 UTT in particular,  moving to a more complex and open based view of innovation involving the two way  involvement of influencing stakeho lders throughout all stages of the Mode 2 UTT process  Thus, it is evident that the implications of the emergence of the quadruple helix is of sufficient  importance as to warrant a critique of the existing Mode 2 UTT literature from a quadruple  helix perspe ctive to show key themes and research agendas.   4.0 Key Emergent Themes   The SLR literature review led to f our main themes being identified as being critical to  understanding the impact that the emergence  quadruple helix structures  has had on UTT which  provides the basis for  future research agendas . These findings in relation to each theme are  shown in sub sections ( 4.1 – 4.4).
Forthcoming R&D Management   4.1 Theme 1: Tension between basic research and commercialisation   An emergent key theme which has implications for the transition from a triple to quadruple  helix models within Mode 2 UTT  relates to the tensions arising between the various  stakeholders which are now more complex with the addition of societal based innova tion users  and their involvement in the UTT process. The literature suggests that there is a need to identify  and manage these tensions to help advance UTT research and practice agendas (Hughes and  Kitson, 2012; Al -Mubaraki et al., 2013). According to the Lambert’s Report (HM Treasury,  2003: 14) “ companies and universities are not natural partners ”. This lack of affinity has  resulted in tension and conflict throughout the history and process of UTT (Larsen, 2011)  which is likely to increase in a quadruple helix context due to the increased involvement of the  societal based stakeholders often with d iverse agendas. Prior attempts to minimise such tension  and conflict have resulted in legislation, the most significant being the Bayh -Dole Act (1980)  in the USA, which as mentioned, created opportunities for Academic Entrepreneurs to benefit  from their IP , patenting and licensing. However, critics including Goldfard and Henrekson  (2003) acknowledge that the technology push implicit in the Bayh -Dole Act may lead to  limitations in commercial viability of spin -out firm’s products due to a lack of initial, or at least  delayed emphasis on market pull and an over -reliance on technology push. This may have  implications on the objectives of academics versus those of societal based innovation users as  represented in the quadruple helix model where market pull is inc reased.   A significant empirical study by Larsen (2011) notes that a disincentive to would -be academic  entrepreneurs is that basic research is often more cited than applied research, where citations  is a mark of academic esteem. For example
often more cited than applied research, where citations  is a mark of academic esteem. For example , Ambos et al. (2 008) and Huyghe et al. (2014)  suggest that this tension is manifested at an individual level with the academic having difficulty  in reconciling these polarities ultimately requiring separate or ambidextrous structures and
Forthcoming R&D Management   career paths as Mode 2 UTT becomes  increasingly complex due to quadruple helix model  influences. Bercovitz and Feldman’s (2008) and Link and Siegel’s (2005) identify that  resolving the tension depends on local social factors such as training and culture and incentives  related to UTT especi ally in times of significant change such as in the emergence of the  quadruple helix model.   O’Shea et al. (2008) echo this challenge and stress that there are  substantial differences in an individual academic’s ability to publish and engage in academic  enterprise with a range of stakeholders, as is the case in the Quadruple Helix Model, with only  a limited number being capable of successfully operating across the divide. Stokes (1997)  suggests that these tensions can be shown in a classification with axes of fundamental  understanding versus consideration of use. Building on Stokes q uadrant analysis, Larsen  (2011) suggests the need for Universities to dynamically shift towards Pasteur’s quadrant i.e.  maximising both fundamental knowledge contribution and societal use as stressed in the  quadruple helix model. Furthermore, Clausen and K orneliusse (2012) suggest that senior  management should recognise and drive this process at a Mode 2 UTT level by setting effective  strategy and incentives, where the context is likely to be unique for each University due to  variations in societal based innovation user stakeholders with diverse Smart Specialisation  regional strategies, with a contingent, rather than best practice Mode 2 UTT approach  necessitated.   Overall, the emergence of the quadruple helix structure with societal based innovation user  stakeholders is likely to further highlight the tension between basic and applied research with  the need for further significant allocation of resources to meaningfully progress the increased  management demands of operating a Mode 2 UTT quadruple helix model.
Forthcoming R&D Management   4.2 Theme 2: Developing Stakeholder Relationships   A considerable amount of the Mode 2 UTT literature to date, relates to a mechanistic science - based technology push approach to technology development, however Colapinto and Porlezza  (2012) identify that a quadruple helix system depends on not only ‘hard’ infrastructures but  that the ‘soft infrastructure s’ based on societal based innovation user stakeholder interactions  (networking, knowledge transfer, human capital) are just, if not more important. Payumo  et  al.’s (2012) University case analysis suggests that Mode 2 UTT consists of bundles of policies  which depend upon people interactions and partnerships. These tacit people -based UTT  conduits can also lead to risk and uncertainty due to cultural and insti tutional bias across diverse  stakeholders which ultimately limit UTT effectiveness especially where a wider range of  societal stakeholders are involved as in the quadruple helix model (Lee, 2012).   Hidalgo and Albors (2008) and Plewa et al., (201 3) note th at a core element of the Mode 2  UTT processes, especially in a quadruple helix context, is the ability to manage stakeholder  relationships strategically. Miller et al., (2014) and McAdam et al., (2012) apply stakeholder  theory to explore the transitioning entrepreneurial university  and identify that this increasingly  open process raises issues in relation to the ability to manage multiple stakeholders objectives  and often competing interests in a Mode 2 UTT quadruple helix setting. In particular, these  studies identify that power re source relationships exist with UTT stakeholders whereby  stakeholders will use withholding or usage strategies in order to exert their salience and achieve  their own objectives. These may conflict with academic stakeholders whose agendas are more  focussed primarily on obtaining resources to carry out research rather than on  commercialisation as identified by Perkmann et al .
resources to carry out research rather than on  commercialisation as identified by Perkmann et al . (2013). Whilst the influence multiple  stakeholders have on UTT is not new, this has only been discussed in a passive nature (Hidalgo  and Albors, 2008).
Forthcoming R&D Management   It is noted within the literature that quadruple stakeholder groups encapsulate stakeholders  which are both regional (Todtling and Trippl, 2005; Ivanova, 2014) and organisational (i.e.  organisational type) (Van Looy et al., 2011; Hewitt -Dundas, 2012) specific. Whilst core UTT  activities and structural mechanisms across universities and regions may look similar,  Galbraith and McAdam (2013) note that the interaction and relationships between these diverse  stakeholders in a Quadruple Helix se tting as a result of contextual factors will vary and may  significantly affect UTT outcomes.   One of the most important people based aspects for a functioning quadruple helix is the quality  of academic entrepreneurs (MacGregor et al., 2010; Miller et al., 2014). Extant research   identifies that there are multiple, often conflicting demands on the academic entrepreneur’s  time (Perkmann et al., 2013). Given the considerable distance between typical industry and  academic knowledge frontiers, i.e. between academ ics and societal based innovation user  stakeholders,  significant effort is required  in coordination (Rothaermel et al., 2007; Perkmann  and Walsh, 2007; Kotha et al., 2012). The academic or Principal Investigator (PI) is a core  component in the UTT process  and whilst all academics possess expert knowledge in their area,  many academics vary in relation to their entrepreneurial attitudes and ability to engage with a  wider range of stakeholders in the quadruple helix setting  (Bozeman, 2000; Clarysse et al.,  2011 ; Urbano and Guerrero, 2013) . Indeed, Perkmann et al. (2013) identify that engagement  with industry and societal based end users is reliant upon individual characteristics of  academics such as demographics, career trajectory, productivity and motivatio n. Furthermore,  organisational factors such as technology transfer support, formal incentives, department  quality and department climate may impact upon willingness and
formal incentives, department  quality and department climate may impact upon willingness and ability of academics to  engage with industry and end users.
Forthcoming R&D Management   In sum, university polices and structures need to encourage the engagement of quadruple helix  stakeholders in Mode 2 UTT, with a recognition that engagement levels will vary across  university types.  Furthermore, it is evident that many academics still do not possess the skills,  ability and motivation to network and interact effectively with societal based innovation users  in a co -creational manner ( MacGregor et al., 2010; Miller et al., 2014 ) which may hinder the  realisation of quadruple helix implementation in Mode 2 UTT settings.   4.3 Theme 3: UTT Performance Measures and Entities   Mode 2 UTT performance measures have mainly focused on the output of entities such as  patents, licenses, spin -outs, job creation (Payumo et al., 2012; Al -Mubaraki et al., 2013).  However, Tello et al. (2011) suggest that these limited UTT performance measur es can instil a  bounded rationality, especially in the more open innovation pull setting of the Quadruple Helix  model. Campbell et al. (2004) suggest that UTT performance measurements are emergent in  nature as a result of on-going  change in the external en vironment and that many measures are  not adequately recorded such as tacit based activity costs and effectiveness which are  significant when universities are operating within complex stakeholder relationships as in the  quadruple helix context (Carayannis a nd Campbell, 2014). However, Grimaldi et al., (2011)  and Clausen and Korneliussen (2012) suggest that contextual performance measures such as  institutional and geographic factors involving regional stakeholders as societal based  innovation users (Hayter, 2 013) are required as opposed to  a “one size fit all” approach.  Moreover, Hughes and Kitson (2012) suggest that performance measurement in UTT (in  addressing both Mode 2 and Mode 3 UTT)  should consider constraints by scientific discipline:   Health Sciences (culture); Science, Technology, Engineering and Maths (STEM)
discipline:   Health Sciences (culture); Science, Technology, Engineering and Maths (STEM) (costs,  resources, partner identification, agreement on IP), Arts and Humanities (lack of time, rewards  and poor marketing) and Social Sciences (bureaucratic, lack of resources, timescales, lack of
Forthcoming R&D Management   experience and culture). These constraints may impinge on the ability of certain disciplines to  fully integrate societal based innovation users in quadruple helix contexts into their UTT  processes which supports research by MacGregor et  al., (2010) who question certain region’s  readiness for the quadruple helix depending on industry sector predominance.    A reoccurring theme in Mode 2 UTT performance measurement throughout the literature is the  challenges surrounding IP which is made more  complex in a quadruple helix context when  multiple stakeholders are collaborating.  Larsen (2011) suggests that IP may actually limit  openness and publishing by academic entrepreneurs as the IP patenting process can take  considerable time in comparison to  fast moving scientific fields. This need for protection may  contrast with the ‘first mover’ strategy of a societal based innovation user. Moreover, the  complexity and legal aspects of IP usually require in -house or external experts, and are beyond  the cur rent expertise of academic entrepreneurs. In some cases, Patent -based Investment Funds  (PBIFs) are established (Gredel et al., 2012), which essentially commoditize patents as  investments (Lee, 2012) where Galbraith and McAdam (2011: 4) suggest that “mini e bays for  technology and IP” are created. Larsen (2011) suggest that patenting is only a small part of  Mode 2 UTT and its measurability (e.g. invention disclosures, number of patent applications,  domestic patents granted) obscures other important Mode 2 UTT  measures arising from  managing quadruple helix based stakeholder interactions such as societal impact. There has  been a trend towards ‘easy access IP’ for certain technologies to be exploited to have benefit  to society and the economy however, many univer sities policies still require IP to be protected  which will cause challenges when engaging in more co -creational Mode 2 UTT with industry  and societal based end users.
when engaging in more co -creational Mode 2 UTT with industry  and societal based end users.   An emergent field over the last five years relates to the emergence of entities referre d to as  intermediaries for Mode 2 UTT (Roxas et al., 2011; Gredel et al., 2012). Etzkowitz (2003)
Forthcoming R&D Management   suggests that intermediaries often form at the interface of key junctures within the UTT process  where Lee (2012: 1569) suggests they obscure these boundaries  in a positive manner to  improve connections, integration and knowledge transfer between stakeholders such as  industry and societal based innovation users. Thus they are “ bounded knowledge commons ”  involving networks from across UTT interfaces, interacting in a co -creational manner to  increase Mode 2 UTT and thus are consistent with the Quadruple Helix model.    Hindle and Yencken (2004) suggest that intermediaries reflect entrepreneurship within Mode  2 UTT in that an entrepreneur can be viewed as an “in -between taker” i.e. availing of interface  and cross boundary opportunities created by the inclusion of societal based innovation users.  Examples of intermediaries entities and evidence of embracing th e role of societal based  innovation users in Mode 2 UTT is seen in Almirall and Wareham’s  (2011) study of Living  Labs where pre -commercial procurement with early user involvement was found to advance  technology development at early or pre -incubation stages  of the UTT process in an innovation  pull manner consistent with the quadruple innovation model. Almirall and Wareham  (2011)   identify processes of knowledge sensing and early prototyping in covering tacit, experiential  and domain based knowledge (i.e. adding knowledge codification on the tacit -explicit  knowledge continuum). Moreover, they suggest that living labs help to obtain  critical mass for  product creation within the UTT process through co -creational inputs from a diverse range of  societal  based  innovation users throughout the Mode 2 UTT process stages. Another example  of intermediary Mode 2 UTT entities is that of platfor m formation (Gredel et al., 2012). Typical  examples are technology trading platforms and integrated project management platforms which  help connect societal based innovation
platforms and integrated project management platforms which  help connect societal based innovation user stakeholders and universities and are a base for  service provision to the Mode 2 UTT process at critical development junctures.
Forthcoming R&D Management   Thus , research shows that intermediaries appear to be effective structures for embracing the  emergence of quadruple helix structures within regions however, research in this area is  emergent. Overall Mode 2 UTT performance measurement and entities are likely to undergo  further transformation as Mode 2 UTT shifts towards the more complex operating environment  of the quadruple helix model.   4.4 Theme 4: UTT and Organisational Structure   In addition to discrete UTT entities, the literature also refers to the overall UTT organisational  structure as a key theme which can be critiqued from a Quadruple Helix perspective. Ideally,  in order to incorporate  the inclusion  of the fourth helix , organ isational structure development  must be integrative in nature as Mode 2 UTT from a quadruple helix perspective is a joint  production effort involving co -creational and coordinated effort involving a range of  stakeholders to perform complex tasks (Kotha et al., 2012).   Most UTT is embryonic and requires significant further work for successful commercialisation  (Kotha et al., 2012). MacGregor et al., (2010) stress that local government need to be realistic  about what entrepreneurial activities a region and st akeholders within that region can engage  with. Indeed, this is evident with the emergence of the Smart Specialisation strategy which  emphasises building on unique regional strengths (Carayannis and Rakhmatullin, 2014). In  addition, Howells et al. (2012) id entify that many industry firms have a lack of willingness to  collaborate with universities despite the push for quadruple helix models. Johnston et al.,  (2010) identify the importance of creating an environment where there is open knowledge  transfer and e xchange between Mode 2 UTT stakeholders so that effective relationships can  emerge as in the quadruple helix context.
Forthcoming R&D Management   The emergence of quadruple helix societal based innovation user stakeholders  will have  particular implications for the role of the Technology Transfer Office (TTO) in the UTT  organisational structure. Numerous studies from 2000 onwards, explored the TTO where the  organisational structure (Bercovitz et al., 2001), capabilities and resources of the TTO has been  found to impact the effectiveness of UTT (O’Shea et al., 2005; Siegel et al., 2007), However,  the quality of TTO officers has been documented as being a barrier to UTT activities  (Rothaermel et al., 2007; Siegel et al., 2007) since this can lead to missed opportunities  particularly when dealing with numerous stakeholders from varying contexts. Research by  Abreu and Grinevich (2013) identify that TTOs recruit a mix of employees with scientific and  business backgrounds in order t o have a competent and complementary pool of staff. However,  in practice, smaller TTOs, often have limited resources (financial and human) which means  they are lacking broad management and technical skills and knowledge of markets to  effectively engage wit h multiple societal based innovation user stakeholders especially in a co - creational manner within the quadruple helix context (Carayannis and Campbell, 2010; Siegel  et al., 2007; O’Shea et al., 2008). Such limitations can result in academics and industry  questioning the competency of the TTO (Siegel et al., 2004; Klofsten et al., 2010) with a  detrimental effect on commercialisation levels and success (Siegel et al., 2007).      Carayannis and Rakhmullan (2014) identify that successful innovation between quad ruple  helix stakeholders cannot be expected without appropriate governance structures in both  regions and within institutions. They suggest the need for various new enabling roles which  sponsor the infrastructure needed to help stakeholders interact. In su m, it is evident that  effective support measures and appropriate
help stakeholders interact. In su m, it is evident that  effective support measures and appropriate organisational structures are needed to enhance  quadruple helix based interactions in driving the Mode 2 UTT process (Seppo et al. 2014).
Forthcoming R&D Management   5.0 Transition of UTT from a triple to quadruple helix: A Research Agenda   It is evident from the previous discussion that Mode 2 UTT is gradually progressing from  operating within a triple helix structure to a quadruple helix perspective. H owever, research  exploring Mode 2 UTT within th e increasingly complex network of quadruple helix   stakeholder interactions is in its infancy (Miller et al., 2014; Wright, 2014; Ivanova, 2014) with  empirical studies only beginning to emerge in the last four years. The evolving nature of UTT  has meant that UTT theory and c onceptualisation is still emergent and lacks an overarching  theoretical position or framework (Plewa et al., 2013 ; Zahra et al., 2014). Moreover , the  emergence of the quadruple helix interpretation of UTT presents a number of challenges to  those working in the area of UTT. Since our aim in this paper is to establish a research agenda,  we now identify a number of future research avenues and indicati ve research questions (see  Table 2) which may aid future research and practice of Mode 2 UTT operating within a  quadruple helix framework .  Table 2 about here   The theme of tension between basic research and commercialisation is a re -occurring theme  which can be found in past literature reviews on Mode 2 UTT (Bozeman, 2000; Rothaermel et  al., 2007) . It is evident from existing studies that future research needs to u ndertake contextual  based approaches to exploring this tension where, the type of university and their  corresponding culture may provide unique challenges in relation to engagement with more  collaborative and co -creational stakeholders emerging from the qu adruple helix model . This is  particularly relevant for research intensive universities whose internal promotional  mechanisms may favour  research publication (Van Looy et al., 2011; Hewitt -Dundas, 2012).  Indeed, there is a need to explore how systems are de veloped to address and balance
2012).  Indeed, there is a need to explore how systems are de veloped to address and balance  institutional need  to engage more fully with quadruple helix stakeholders and individual
Forthcoming R&D Management   University staff preferences (Al -Mubaraki et al. , 2013). It is recommended that in order to  motivate academics to engage in collaborativ e UTT  as increasingly required in the quadruple  helix model , further research is needed to probe how conflict can be avoided to the mutual  benefit of basic research and UTT commercialisation and to address what Etzkowitz (2003)  refers to as a blurred area of study.   Studies suggests that Mode 2 UTT is increasingly  becoming an iterative and messy people  based process due to the co -creational and  societal based  innovation user aspects of the  quadruple helix model (Hindle and Yencken, 2004; Lee, 2012; Payumo et al., 2012). However,  there is limited understanding of th e softer side of UTT as a premise for creating  and managing   resultant multiple collaborative  UTT processes and entities (Wilson, 2012; Colapinto and  Porlezza, 2012). Indeed, there is a lack of research exploring issues of trust, relationship  building and t acit knowledge sharing to reflect the increasing complex ‘people’ based aspects  of Mode 2 UTT operating within a quadruple helix ecosystem (Lee, 2012; Payumo et al., 2012).  Furthermore, it is suggested that future research should explore the underlying culture,  objectives and management practices of the institutions involved (e.g. the Quadruple  Helix of  academia, Government, industry and societal based innovation users ) in order to extend  knowledge and understanding of potential conflict and aid understanding of interventions on  how to overcome such conflict (Li et al. , 2008; Plewa et al., 2013 ).  In addition, there is a need  to recognise the important role the academic entrepreneur plays in impacting the success of  quadruple helix stakeholder engagement in UTT ( Miller et al., 2014 ). Future research needs to  explore how internal mechanisms, polic ies and structures can be designed to motivate  academics to engage more collaboratively with industry and
structures can be designed to motivate  academics to engage more collaboratively with industry and societal based innovation users.   Furthermore, there  is a need for future research to determine commonalties and differences  between stakeholders perc eptions of more collaborative Mode 2 UTT  (Siegel et al. , 2004;  Galbraith and McAdam, 2011) which according to Tello et al. (2011) will help define the
Forthcoming R&D Management   decision making process within Mode 2 UTT and aid knowledge flow towards shorter  commercialisation  cycle  times .   Whilst the process of Mode 2 UTT has been explored in detail in the past from a triple helix  perspective (Bozeman, 2000;  Rothaermel et al., 2007; Guerrero and Urbano, 2010 ), the  addition of societal based innovation users  from the quadruple helix model presents the need  for new performance mechanisms, processes and entities to reflect more collaborative and co - creational UTT (Miller et al., 2014). It is evident that there is a need for future studies to explore  a move away  from the formalised, structured , innovation  push  and relatively closed processes  to business models and entities which are more flexible, iterative and open (Galbraith and  McAdam, 2011; Colapinto and Porlezza, 2012) .  In terms of UTT process flow, we propose future research on institutional mechanisms (e.g.  from triple and quadruple helix constituencies) which must be in place to support and guide a  more collaborative UTT process at appropriate junctures or points of need (e.g. funding stages,  incentiv es and authorisation mechanisms) (Campbell et al. , 2004; Payumo et al. , 2012).  Consistent with McAdam  et al. (2012) it is suggested that more research on process mapping  representations of Mode 2 UTT incorporating people, culture and institutional issues i s needed  to clarify the increasingly complex UTT processes involving participation from numerous  societal based innovation user stakeholders  with an increased emphasis on innovation pull.   Furthermore, it is not clear, how professional practices and standar ds (e.g. quality) can be  integrated within Mode 2 UTT to reduce process uncertainty and variability if quadruple helix  stakeholders are involved in co -creating technologies (Carayannis and Rakhmullan, 2014). In  order to accurately explore UTT process flow barriers and enablers, there is a need for  longitudinal case
accurately explore UTT process flow barriers and enablers, there is a need for  longitudinal case based research where existing documented process maps may have been  superseded with more formal tacit process activities reflecting the integration of additional
Forthcoming R&D Management   external stakeholders within the quadruple helix model (Campbell et al. 2004; Hindle and  Yencken, 2004; Wright, 2014).   Mode 2 UTT process performance measures have mainly focused on numbers of patents,  licenses, spin -outs, job creation and funding as dominant measures in the innovatio n push based  triple helix model (Al-Mubaraki et al., 2013; Payumo et al., 2012). However, concurring with  Tello et al. (2010) it is suggested that these limited UTT performance measures can instil a  bounded rationality with a consequent need for further re search on a wider range of potential  UTT performance measures reflecting more open innovation approaches characteristic of  quadruple helix structures (Perkmann and Walsh, 2007; Miller et al., 2014). With the changing  policy and practice to reflect operatin g within quadruple helix structures, UTT performance  measurements are emerge nt in nature with many measures  not being adequately addressed  such  as tacit based activity costs and effectiveness, thus there is a need for more fine grained UTT  performance meas ures (Campbell et al. 2004; Tello et al., 2010; Al -Mubaraki et al., 2013).  Furthermore, as mentioned, contextual sets of performance measures (institutional and  geographic) differing societal based innovation users are needed rather than assuming a best  practice set can be established (Clausen and Korneliussen, 2012; Hayter, 2013) which suggests  the need for more case -based research.   In relation to UTT entities, there have been sustained and prolonged calls for further research  into alternative UTT channels  and models  (Scott, 2002; Tello et al., 2010; Hughes and Kitson,  2012). While patenting and licensing have been widely explored in the literature, their defacto  status of representing UTT is again an example of bounded rationality (Tello et al., 20 10) which  does not account for changes in stakeholder relationships evident in the emergence of  quadruple helix
not account for changes in stakeholder relationships evident in the emergence of  quadruple helix stakeholders.
Forthcoming R&D Management   Living labs and competency research centres have emerged as successful examples of  intermediaries comprising of quadruple helix en tities where they provide mechanisms for  effective communication  between quadruple helix stakeholders improving technology  development and market viability in a co -creational manner (Almirall and Wareham, 2011).  However, their role in UTT is lacking depth of understanding illustrating that further research  into their structure, operation and performance is needed ( Almirall and Wareham, 2011; Gredel  et al., 2012). Furthermore, concurring with Roxas et al. (2011) and Galbraith and McAdam  (2011) it is suggested there is a need for further research on the performance and effectiveness  of intermediaries by taking a contextual approach where intermediaries in Mode 2 UTT are  likely to vary across Uni versities and regions reflecting unique capabilities  of societal based  innovation users within the quadruple helix model .   In relation to UTT organisational structure, Etzkowitz (1998) argues that the loci of scientific  knowledge has moved from the “ivory tower” towards entrepreneurial science which is a  progressive interplay of cognitive opportunities, institutional rearrangements and normative  change. This statement is even more significant currently given the progression to the  quadruple helix model . Cur rent UTT policy assumes interaction between quadruple helix  stakeholders will naturally happen however, as Arnkil et al. (2010) notes, policy only creates  conducive conditions and which may differ substantially from practice. Future research is  needed ther efore in order to gain a more nuanced understanding of how to create collaborative  and co -ordinated environments with multiple diverse stakeholders interacting as  suggested in  the quadruple helix model (O’Shea et al., 2008; Kotha et al., 2012).  Furthermore  in terms of  organisational structure  the TTO faced significant challenges as a
Furthermore  in terms of  organisational structure  the TTO faced significant challenges as a result of limited resources  (Sharma et al., 2006). With the inclusion of societal based innovation user stakeholders , it is  anticipated that these challenges may intensify. Con sequently, further research is needed into  how TTO staff attempt to develop a broad set of boundary spanning skills including marketing,
Forthcoming R&D Management   technical and negotiating capabilities which will bridge collaboration between quadruple helix  stakeholders (Wright et al., 2009). Furthermore, future research should explore how TTOs can  effectively balance the objectives of different stakeholders particularly with the emergence of  additional stakeholders within a quadruple helix model  (Clarysse et al., 2011; Miller  et al.,  2014) who can allocate  expenditure and resources available for technology commercialisation  activities.     6.0 Conclusion   Given the recent importance place on the inclusion  of societal based innovation users in policy  initiatives  and the emergence of  such in practice , the aim of this paper wa s to critically review  Mode 2 UTT from a quadruple helix perspective and to identify key themes and future research  agendas. The aim of this paper was to critically review the Mode 2 UTT literature from a  quadruple  helix perspective  to identify future research.  Given the changing role of universities  in society (Lu and Etzkowitz, 2008; Urbano and Guerrero, 2013) requiring closer interaction  between quadruple helix stakeholders (Wilson, 2012; RIS, 2014) and a focus o n leveraging  regional strengths through smart specialisation (Barca et al., 2012; Camagni and Capello,  2013), this review is timely in order to help understand the increasing complexity of Mode 2  UTT  through the emergence of the quadruple helix model .   On the basis of the SLR we proposes a research agenda ( Table 2) which will aid both practical  and theoretical conceptualisations of the range of issues facing Mode 2 UTT operating within  quadruple helix structures. It is evident that historical issues with un iversities involvement in  UTT still remain a challenge . Accordingly,  the need to engage in more open and collaborative  Mode 2 UTT with quadruple helix stakeholders  will not only intensif y existing challenges but  also presents new challenges. W ith the evolving nature of UTT
intensif y existing challenges but  also presents new challenges. W ith the evolving nature of UTT into more collaborative
Forthcoming R&D Management   networked stakeholder relationships  consistent with the quadruple helix model there is a need  for new conceptualisations and models to understand  and help manage  the increasing  complexity of Mode 2 UTT (Perkmann and Walsh, 2007; Rothaermel et al., 2007; Urbano and  Guerrero, 2013; Carayannis and Rakhmatullin, 2014). Indeed, changing organisational and  contextual factors resurface past challenges which warrant further exploration and refinement  in ligh t of chang es as a result of  the emergence of the quadruple helix model . From the SLR, it  was found that closer collaboration of societal based innovation user  stakeholders identifies  the  need to not only re-develop Mode 2 UTT processes (Colapinto and Porlezza, 2012; Miller et  al., 2014)  but the need to align institutional culture, department climate, performance  mechanisms and support mechanisms throughout the university to meet this goal .    It is evident that research exploring the challenges of quadr uple helix models  is still in its  infancy (Zahra and Wright, 2011; Schoonmaker and Carayannis, 2013; Seppo et al., 2014) with  existing research predominantly at the macro level reflecting a need for more longitudinal and  case based research at micro levels  to fully understand its complexity (Wright, 2014). The  suggestions for futur e research agendas contribute  to both theory and  practice by identifying  the core issues which need to be explored to ease transition into operating within a quadruple  helix model . Whilst a structured SLR was undertaken, UTT is a vast and complex process (e.g.  Modes 1 – 3) thus the issues identified by focussing on Mode 2 UTT are not exhaustive of the  far reaching challenges a quadruple helix model  poses. However, the discussion and  subsequent future research agendas show how current and emergent themes in Mode 2 UTT  can be further explored in terms of potential research questions at a theme and sub-theme level.  The research
explored in terms of potential research questions at a theme and sub-theme level.  The research questions are sufficiently bro ad as to warrant further sharpening and focusing for  any given future study relating to UTT within the complex networks of stakeholder  relationships  in quadruple helix models .
Forthcoming R&D Management   References   Abreu, M., Grinevich, V., Hughes, A. and Kitson, M. (2009), Knowledge Exchange   between Academics and the Business, Public and Third Sectors, Centre for Business   Research, University of Cambridge , Cambridge.   Abreu, M.  and Grinevich, V. (2013) The nature of academic entrepreneurship in the UK:  widening the focus on entrepreneurial activities. Research Policy,  42 (2), 408 -422.  Almirall, E. and Wareham, J. (2011)  Living Labs: Arbiters of mid - and ground -level  innovation. Technology Analysis and Strategic Management 23 (1), 87 -102.  Al-Mubaraki, A., Mubarak, H. and Busier, M. (2013) Business Incubation as an Economic  Development Strategy: A Literature Review. International Journal of Management, 30 (1),  362-367.  Ambos, T. C., Makela, K., Birkinshaw, J. and D'este, P. (2008) When Does University  Research Get Commercialized? Creating Ambidexterity in Research Institutions. Journal of  Management Studies , 45, 1424 -1447.   Arnkil, R., Järvensivu A., Koski, P. and  Piirain en, T. (2010)  Exploring Quadruple Helix –  Outlining user -oriented innovation models. University of Tampere, Institute for Social  Research, Work Research Centre.   Asheim , B.T. and  Coenen , L. (2005 ) Knowledge bases and regional innovation systems:  comparing Nordic clusters. Research Policy,  34 (8), 1173 –90.  Barca, F., McCann, P. and Rodríguez -Pose, A. (2012) The case for regional development  intervention: Place -based versus place -neutral approaches.  Journal of Regional Science, 52 (1),  134-152.   Becheikh, N., Landry, R. and Amara, N. (2006) Lessons from innovation empirical   studies in the manufacturing sector: A systematic review of the literature from   1993 -2003. Technovation, 26, 644 -664.  Bercovitz, J., Feldman, M., Feller, I. and Burton, R. (2001) Organizational Structure as a  Determinant of Academic Patent and Licensing Behavior: An Exploratory Study of Duke,  Johns Hopkins, and Pennsylvania State Universities.
Behavior: An Exploratory Study of Duke,  Johns Hopkins, and Pennsylvania State Universities. Journal of Technology Transf er, 26 (1- 2), 21 -35.   Bercovitz, J. and Feldman, M. (2008) Academic Entrepreneurs: Organizational Change at the  Individual Level. Organization Science, 19, 69-89.  Bercovitz,  J. and M. P. Feldman. (2006) Entrepreneurial  Universities  and Technology  Transfer:   A Conceptual  Framework  for Understanding  Knowledge -Based  Economic   Development . Journ al of Technology  Transfer , 31(1): 175 -188.
Forthcoming R&D Management   Bozeman, B. (2000) Technology Transfer and Public Policy: A Review of Research and  Theory. Research Policy , 29 (4), 627 -655.  Bozeman, B., Rimes, H. and  Youtie, J. (2015). The evolving state -of-the-art in technology   transfer research: Revisiting the contingent effectiveness model. Research Policy , 44, 34-49.  Camagni, R. and Capello, R. (2013) Regional Innovation Patterns and the EU Regional Policy  Reform:  Toward Smart Innovation Policies. Growth and Change, 44 (2), 355 -389.   Campbell, E.G., Powers, J.B., Blumenthal, D., Biles, B. (2004) Inside the Triple Helix:  Technology Transfer and Commercialization In The Life Sciences. Health affairs,  23 (1), 64 - 76.   Carayannis, E.G. and Campbell, D.F.J. (2009) “Mode 3” and “Quadruple Helix”: toward a 21st  century fractal innovation ecosystem. International Journal of Technology Management , 46  (3/4), 201 –234.  Carayannis, E.G., Barth, R.D. and Campbell, D.F.J. (2012) The quinuple helix innovation  model: global warming as a challenge and driver for innovation. Journal of Innovation  and  Entrepreneurship , 1, 1–12.  Carayannis, E.G. and Campbell, D.F.G. (2014) Developed democracies versus emerging  autocracies: arts, democracy, and innovation in Quadruple Helix innovation systems . Journal  of Innovation and Entrepreneurship , 3, 12-24.  Carayannis, E.G. and Rakhmatullin, R. (2014) The Quadruple/Quintuple Innovation Helixes  and Smart Specialisation Strategies for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth in Europe and  Beyond.  Journal of the Knowledge Economy,  5 (2), 212 -239.  Chesbrough H. (2007)  Why companies should have open business models. MIT Sloan  Management Review , 48, 22-28.   Cao, Y., Zhao, L. and Chen, R. (2009)  Institutional structure and incentives of technology  transfer. Journal of Technology Management in China , 4 (1), 67 -84.   Chesbrough H. (2011)  Bringing open innovation to services. MIT Sloan Management Review,   52, 85 -91.  Clarysse, B., Tartari, V. and
innovation to services. MIT Sloan Management Review,   52, 85 -91.  Clarysse, B., Tartari, V. and Salter, A. (2011) The Comparative Role of TTOs and Individual  Level behaviour of Academics to Explain Academic Entrepreneurship. Research Policy , 40  (8), 1084 –1093.   Clausen, T. and Korneliussen, T. (2012) The relationship betw een entrepreneurial orientation  and speed to the market: The case of incubator firms in Norway. Technovation , 32 (9-10), 560 - 567.
Forthcoming R&D Management   Colapinto, C. and Porlezza, C. (2012) Innovation in Creative Industries: From the Quadruple  Helix Model to the Systems Theory.  Journal of the Knowledge Economy , 3 (4), 343 -33.  Cooke, P. (2005) R egionally asymmetric knowledge capabilities and open innovation  Exploring 'Globalisation 2' - A new  model of industry organisation , Research Policy,   34, 8,  1128 -1149.   Djokovic, D. and Souitaris, V. (2008) Spinouts from academic institutions: a literature review  with suggestions for future research. Journal of Technology Transfer , 33 (3), 225 -247.  Edvardsson, B., T ronvoll, B. and Gruber, T. (2011) Expanding understanding  of service  exchange and value co -creation:  a social construction approach , Academy of Marketing  Science.Journal,   39, 2, 327 -339.  Etzkowitz, H.  (1998) The norms of entrepreneurial science: Cognitive effects of the new  university -industry linkages.  Research Policy , 27 (8), 823 -833.  Etzkowitz, H. (2003) Research groups as 'quasi -firms': The invention of the entrepreneurial  university. Research Policy,  32 (1), 109 -121.  Etzkowitz, H. and Leydesdorff, L. (2000) The dynamics of innovation: from national s ystems  and ‘Mode 2’ to a triple helix of university -industry -government relations. Research Policy , 29  (2), 109 -23.  Etzkowitz, H. and Klofsten, M. (2005) The innovating region: Toward a theory of knowledge  based regional development. R&D Management , 35, 243 –255.   Galbraith, B.  and McAdam, R. (2011) The promise and problem with open innovation.  Technology Analysis and Strategic  Management , 23 (1), 1 –6.  Gibbons, M., Limoges, C., Nowotny, H., Schwar tzman, S., Scott, P., Trow, M. (1994)  The new  production of knowledge: the dynamics of science and research in contemporary societies .  London: Sage.    Goldfard, B. and Henrekson, M. (2003) Bottom -up versus top -down policies towards the  commercialization of university intellectual property. Research Policy , 32 (4), 639 –658
the  commercialization of university intellectual property. Research Policy , 32 (4), 639 –658  Gredel, D., Kramer, M. and Bend, B. (2012) Patent -based investment funds as innovation  intermediaries for SMEs: In -depth analysis of reciprocal interactions, motives and fallacies.  Technovation , 32 (9-10), 536 -549.   Grimaldi, R., Kenney, M., Siegel, D. S. and Wright, M. (2011) 30 Years after Bayh -Dole:  Reassessing Academic Entrepreneurship. Research Policy , 40 (8), 1045 -1057.   Guerrero, M., Urbano, D. (2010) The development of an entrepreneurial university. The  Journal  of Technology Transfer , 37 (1), 43 -74.
Forthcoming R&D Management   Gunasekara, C. (2006) Reframing the Role of Universities in the Development of Regional  Innovation Systems, Journal of Technology Transfer,  31, (1), 101-113.  Hayter, C.S. (2013) Conceptualizing knowledge -based entrepreneurship networks:  perspectives from the literature. Small Business Economics , 41 (4), 899 -911.   Hewitt -Dundas, N. (2012) Research intensity and knowledge transfer activity in UK  Universities.  Research Policy , 41 (2), 262 -275.  Hidalgo, A. and Albors, J. (2008) Innovation management techniques and tools: a re view  from theory and practice. R&D Management , 38 (2), 113 -27.  Hindle, K. and Yencken, J. (2004) Public Research Commercialisation, Entrepreneurship and  New Technology Based Firms: An Integrated Model. Technovation , 24 (10): 793 –803.  HM Treasury. (2003) La mbert review of business -industry collaboration available at:    http://www.hmtreasury.gov.uk/media/9/0/lambert_review_final_450.pdf  (24/03/2011).   Howells, J. Ramlogan, R. a nd Cheng, S.L. (2012) Innovation and University collaboration:  paradox and complexity within the knowledge economy.  Cambridge Journal of Economics,  36  (3), 703 -721.    Hughes, A. and Kitson, M. (2012) Pathways to impact and the strategic role of   universities: new evidence on the breadth and depth of university knowledge exchange in   the UK and the factors constraining its development. Cambridge Journal of   Economics , 36 (3), 723 -750.  Huyghe, A., Knockaert, M., Wright, M. and Piva, E. (2014) Technology transfer offices as  boundary spanners in the pre -spin-off process: the case of a hybrid model. Small Business  Economics, 43, 289 -307.  Ivanova, I. (2014) Quadruple Helix Systems and Symmetry: a Step towards Helix Innovation  System Classification.  Journal of the Knowledge Economy,  5 (2), 357 -369.  Johnston, L., Robinson, S. and Lockett, N. (2010) Recognising ‘open innovation’ in HEI - industry interaction for knowledge transfe r and exchange. International
‘open innovation’ in HEI - industry interaction for knowledge transfe r and exchange. International Journal of  Entrepreneurial Behaviour and Research,  16 (6), 540 -60.  Kenney, M. and Mowery, D. (2014)  Public Universities and Regional Development: Insights  from the University of California System. Palo Alto, CA, Stanford University Press.   Klofsten, M., Heydebreck, P., and Jones -Evans, D. (2010) Transferring good practice beyond  organizational borders: Lessons from transferring an entrepreneurship programme. Regional  Studies , 44 (6), 791 -799.
Forthcoming R&D Management   Kotha, R., George, G. and Srikanth, K. (2012) Bri dging the Mutual Knowledge Gap:  Coordination and the Commercialisation of University Science. Academy of Management   Journal , 56 (2), 498 -524.  Larsen, M.T. (2011) The implications of academic enterprise for public science: An overview  of the empirical evidence. Research Policy , 40 (1), 6 -19.  Lee, P. (2012) Transcending the Tacit Dimension: Patents, Relationships, and Organizational  Integration in  Technology Transfer.  California Law Review,  100 (9), 1035 -1057   Leydesdorff, L. (2011) The Triple Helix, Quadruple Helix, and an N -Tuple of Helices:  Explanatory Models for Analyzing the Knowledge -Based Economy ? Journal of the  Knowledge Economy , 3 (1), 25 -35.  Li, Y., Yi, L., Yi, D. and Li, M. (2008) Entrepreneurial orientation, strategic flexibilities and  indigenous firm innovation in transitional China. International Journal of Technology  Management , 41 (1), 223 -246.  Link, A. N. and Siegel, D. S.  (2005) Generating science -based growth: an econometric analysis  of the impact of organizational incentives on university –industry technology transfer. The  European Journal of Finance , 11, 169 -181.  Lipinski, J., Lester, D.L. and Nicholls, J. (2013) Promoting Social Entrepreneurship:  Harnessing Experiential Learning with Technology Transfer to Create Knowledge Based  Opportunities. Journal of Applied Business Research,  29 (2), 597 -606.   Lu, L. and Etzk owitz, H. (2008) Strategic challenges for creating knowledge -based  innovation in China: transforming triple helix university -government -industry relations.  Journal of Technology Management in China,  3 (1), 5 –11.   MacGregor, S.P. Marques -Gou, P. and Simon -Villar, A. (2010) Gauging Readiness for the  Quadruple Helix:  A Study of 16 European Organisations. Journal of the Knowledge  Economy,  1 (3), 173 -190.  Markman, G.D., Siegel, D.S. and Wright, M. (2008) Research and Technology  Commercialization. Journal of
G.D., Siegel, D.S. and Wright, M. (2008) Research and Technology  Commercialization. Journal of Management Studies , 45, 1401 -1423.   McAdam, R., Miller, K., McAdam, M. and Teague, S. (2012) The development of University  Technology Transfer stakeholder relationships at a regional level: lessons for the future.  Technovation , 32 (1), 57–67.  Miles, M.B. and Huberman, M. (1994) Qualitative Data Analysis: An expanded Sourcebook.  Sage: London.   Miller,  K., McAdam, M. and McAdam, R. (2014)  The University Business Model: Evolution  and Emergence from a Stakeholder Perspective. R&D Management , 44, 265 -287.
Forthcoming R&D Management   Mitev, N. and Venters, W. (2009) Reflexive Evaluation of an Academic -Industry Research  Collaboration: Can Mode 2 Management Research be Achieved? The Journal of  Management Studies, 46, (5), 733 -749.   O’Shea, R.P, Allen, T. J., Chevalier, A. and Roche, F. ( 2005) Entrepreneurial orientation,  technology transfer and spinoff performance of U.S. universities. Research Policy,  34, 994 – 1009.   O'Shea, R.P., Chugh, H. and Allen, T.J. (2008) Determinants and consequences of university  spinoff activity: A conceptual f ramework. International Journal of Technology Transfer , 33  (6), 653 –666.  Payumo, J., Gang, Z., Pulumbarit, E., Jones, K., Maredia, K. and Grimes, H. (2012) Managing  intellectual property and technology commercialization: Comparison and analysis of practices,  success stories and lessons learned from public research universities in developing Asia.  Innovation Management, Policy and Practice , 14 (4), 478 -494.   Perkmann, M. and Walsh, K. (2007) University –industry relationships and open innovation:  towards a research agenda. International Journal of Management Reviews,  9 (4), 259 –280.  Perkmann, M., Tartari, V., McKelvey, M., Autio, E., Brostrom, A., D’Este, P., Fini, R., Geuna,  A.,  Grimaldi, R.,  Hughes,A.,  Krabel, S., Kitson, M.,  Llerena, P., Lissoni, F., Salter, A. and  Sobrero, M. (2013) Academic engagement and commercialisation : A review of the literature  on university Industry relations. Research Policy,  42 (2), 423 –442.   Pittaway, L. and Cope, J. (2007) Simulating Entrepreneurial Learning Integrating Experiential  and Collaborative Approaches to Learning. Management Learning , 38 (2), 211 -233.  Plewa, C., Rampersad, G., Johnson, C.R., Baaken, T., MacPherson, G. and Korff, N. (2013).  The evolution of university -industry linkages –A framework. Journal of Engineering and  Technology Management,  30 (1), 21 -44.  Prajapati, V., Tripathy, S. and Dureja, H. (2013) Product lifecycle management through
21 -44.  Prajapati, V., Tripathy, S. and Dureja, H. (2013) Product lifecycle management through patents  and regulatory strategies. Journal of Medical Marketing,  13 (3), 171 -180.  Rademakers, M., 2005. Corporate Universities, Driving Force of Knowledge Innovation. The  Journal of Workplace Learning 17 (1), 130 -136.  RIS (2014) National/Regional Innovation Strategies for Smart Specialisation. Cohesion Policy  2014 -2020, European Commission. Available online:  http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/docgener/informat/2014/smart_specialisation_en. pdf (accessed 10/12/2014).   Rothaermel, F.T., Agung, S.D. and Jiang, L. (2007) University entrepreneurship: A taxonom y  of the literature. Industrial and Corporate Change , 16 (4), 691 -791.
Forthcoming R&D Management   Roxas, S.A., Piroli, G. and Sorrentino, M. (2011) Efficiency and evaluation analysis of a  network of technology transfer brokers. Technology analysis and strategic management , 23  (1), 7 -24.   Savva, N. and Scholtes, S. (2014) Opt -Out Options in New Product Co -development  Partnerships.  Production and Operations Management,  23, (8), 1370 -1386.   Schoonmaker, M.G. and Carayannis, E.G. (2013) Mode 3: A Poposed Classification Scheme  for the Knowledge Economy and Society. Journal of the Knowledge Economy , 4 (4), 56 -577.  Schuurman, D., Lievens, B., De Marez, L. & Ballon, P. 2012, "Innovation from user experience  in Living Labs: revisiting the 'innovation factory' -concept with a panel -based and user -centered  approach", The International Society for Professional Innovation Management (ISPIM),  Manchester, 1 -11.  Scott, S. (2002) Selling university technolog y: Patterns from MIT. Management Science,  48  (1), 122 -137.   Seppo, M., Roigas, K. and Varblane, U. (2014) Governmental Support Measures for  University -Industry Cooperation – Comparative View in Europe. Journal of the Knowledge  Economy,  5 (2), 388 -408.  Siegel, D. S., Veugelers, R. and Wright, M. (2007) Technology Transfer Offices and  Commercialization of University Intellectual Property: Performance and Policy Implications.  Oxford Review of Economic Policy , 23 (4), 640 -660.   Siegel, D.S., Waldman, D.D., Atwater, L.E. and Link, A.N. (2004) Toward a model of the  effective transfer of scientific knowledge from academicians to practitioners: qualitative  evidence from the commercialization of university technologies. Journal of Engineering and  Technology Manag ement , 21, 115 -42.  Starkey, K. and Madden, P.  (2001)  Bridging the Relevanc e Gap: Aligning Stakeholders in   the Future of Management Research. British Journal o f Management , 12, 3-26.  Stokes, D.D. (1997) Pasteur´s Quadrant: basic science and technological innovation.  The  Brookings Institution,
(1997) Pasteur´s Quadrant: basic science and technological innovation.  The  Brookings Institution, Washington .  Swan, J., Bresnen, M., Robertson, M., Newell, S. and Dopson, S. (2010) When Policy meets  Practice: Colliding Logics and the Challenges of 'Mode 2' Initiatives in the Tr anslation of  Academic Knowledge , Organization Studies, 31 (9), 1311.   Tello, S., Latham, S. and Kijewski, V. (2011) Assessing differences between technology  transfer officers and institutions in the decision to commercialise new technologies.  International Journal of Technology Transfer and Commercialisation , 10 (1), 93 -111.
Forthcoming R&D Management   Thorpe,  R., Holt, R., MacPherson, A. and Pittaway, L. (2005) Using knowledge within small  and medium -sized firms: A systematic review of the evidence. International Journal of  Management Reviews,  7 (4), 257 -281.  Tödt ling, F. and Trippl, M. (2005) One size fits all? Towards a differentiated regional  innovation policy approach. Research Policy , 34 (1), 1023 -1209.   Tranfield, D., Denyer, D. and Smart, P. (2003) Towards a Methodology for Developing  Evidence -Informed Manag ement Knowledge by Means of Systematic Review. British Journal  of Management, 14 (3), 207 -222.   Tranfield, D. and Starkey, K. (1998)  The nature, social organisation and promotion of  management research: Towards policy. British Journal of Management , 9 (4), 341 -353.  Urbano, D. and Guerrero, M. (2013) Entrepreneurial Universities: Socioeconomic Impacts of  Academic Entrepreneurship in a European Context. Economic Development Quarterly , 27 (1),  40-55.  Van Looy, B., Landoni, P., Callaert, J., van Pottelsberghe, B., Sapsal is, E. and Debackere, K.   (2011) Entrepreneurial effectiveness of European universities: An empirical assessment of  antecedents and trade -offs. Research Policy , 40 (4), 553 -564.  Wilson, T. (2012) A Review of Business –Industry Collab oration. London: Department for  Business, Innovation and Skills. Available at:   https://www.gov.uk/go vernment/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/32383/12 -610- wilson -review -business -university -collaboration.pdf  (accessed 18/12/2014).   Wright , M., Piva , E., Mosey , S. and Lockett , A. (2009) Academic entrepreneurship and  business schools , Journal of Technology Transfer , 34, 560 -587.  Wright, M. (2014) Academic Entrepreneurship, Technology Transfer and Society: Where  Next? Journal of Technology Transfer , 39, 322 -334.  Zahra, S.A. and Wright, M. (2011) Entrepreneurship’s next act. Academy of Management  Perspectives,  25 (4), 67 –83.
Forthcoming R&D Management   Zahra, S.A. Wright, M. and Abdelgawad, G. (2014) Contextualisation and Advancement of  Entrepreneurship Research. International Small Business Journal,  32, 479 -500.    Figure 1: Knowledge Production Modes and University Knowledge Transfer   Source: Gibbons et al., (1994).     Figure 2: Triple and Quadruple Helix UTT   Source: Adapted from Carayannis and Campbell (2009)
Forthcoming R&D Management     Figure 3: Trajectory of Entrepreneurial University and UTT Stakeholder Relationship     Table 1: Papers Extracted from Systematic Literature Review
Forthcoming R&D Management   Table 2: Agenda for Future Research   Theme  Sub theme  Example Research Questions  References   1. Tension  between basic  research and  commercialisation  Research versus Publishing  Conflicts                   Polarities of research and UTT       Negative outcomes of Bayh -Dole  Act   What mechanisms (e.g. incentives, training) can help balance basic  research and co -creational technology commercialisation with industry  and societal based end users?         How do contextual issues (e.g. University type and culture) impact  collaborative research activities with quadruple helix stakeholders?       What environmental changes are needed to a chieve Pasteur’s  quadrant?     What directions should future enabling legislation take in order to  facilitate collaborative UTT with quadruple helix stakeholders?    Bozeman (2000); Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff (2000);  Campbell et al. (2004); Link and Siegel (2005); Bercovitz  and Feldman, (2008); Perkmann and Walsh, (2007); O’Shea  et al. (2008); Larsen (2011); Hughes and Kitson (2012); Al  Murabaki et al. (2013)     MacGregor et al. (2010); Daskalopoulou et al. (2010); Van  Looy (2011); Hewitt -Dunda, (2012); Galbra ith and  McAdam (2013); Ivanova (2014)     Larsen (2011); Clausen and Korneliusse (2012)       Sharma et al. (2006); Bercovitz and Feldman (2006);  Perkmann and Walsh (2007); Grimaldi (2007); Miller et al.  (2014)   2. Developing Stakeholder  Relationships  People base d aspects of UTT         Balancing conflict               Academic Engagement  How can ‘softer’ infrastructures and social integration mechanisms be  set up to enhance relationship building and knowledge transfer  between quadruple helix stakeholders?     How can perceptions  and objectives of quadruple helix stakeholders be  aligned to reduce conflict during UTT?     How do contextual factors influence university engagement with  quadruple helix stakeholders?     What internal mechanisms, policies and structures will
with  quadruple helix stakeholders?     What internal mechanisms, policies and structures will motivate  academi cs to engage more with industry and societal based end users  (e.g. career stage, incentives, department climate)?  Colapinto and Porlezza (2012);Lee, (2012); Payumo et al.  (2012); Miller et al. (2015)       Hidalgo and Albors (2008); Plewa et al. (2012); McAdam  et  al. 2012; Miller et al. (2014)     MacGregor et al. (2010); Clausen and Korneliussen (2012);  Galbraith and McAdam (2013); Miller et al. (2014); Ivanova  (2014); McAdam et al. (2015)     Markmann et al. (2008); Perkmann and Walsh (2007);  Kotha et al. (2012); P erkmann et al. (2013); Urbano and  Guerrero (2013)
Forthcoming R&D Management     Theme  Sub theme  Further Research Areas  References   3. UTT Performance  Measures and Entities                              UTT and process uncertainty.         UTT process flow dynamics         UTT process performance  measurement.                 UTT Models and Intermediaries  Does the integration of end users in the UTT process enhance or reduce  uncertainty?       How do UTT processes interact with quadruple helix stakeholders at key  process junctures?       Will performance measures be able to balance the needs and priorities  of each quadruple helix stakeholder?     How can tacit -based activity costs and effectiveness or quadruple helix  stakeholder collaboration during UTT be measured?       How do institutional and geographic factors impact upon quadr uple  helix stakeholder engagement during Mode 2 UTT?     What models of UTT allow more effective engagement with quadruple  helix stakeholders overcoming IP issues and conflicting objectives?     What type of intermediaries at core UTT junctures are needed to  increase quadruple helix stakeholder engagement?      Almirall and Wareham (2011); Galbraith and McAdam  (2013); Lee (2012); Siegel et al. (2012)       Siegel et al. (2012); Plewa et al. (2013); Wright (2014);  Zahra et al. (2014); Miler et al. (2014); Seppo et al. ( 2014)       Tello et al. (2011); Plewa et al. (2013); Wright (2014);  Zahra et al. (2014); Miller et al. (2014); Seppo et al. (2014)     Almirall and Wareham (2011); Arnkil et al. (2010); Lee  (2012); Perkmann et al.(2013) Carayannis and Campbell  (2014)     Grimaldi et al. (2011); McAdam et al. (2015); Clausen and  Korneliussen (2012); Hayter (2013);Ivanova (2014)     Arnkil et al. (2010); Mac Gregor et al. (2010); Larsen  (2011); Galbraith and McAdam (2011); Miller et al. (2014);     Etzkowitz (2003);  Hindle and Yencken (2004)  Roxas et al.,  2011; Almirall and Wareham  (2011);Gredel et al. 2012; Lee  (2012)   4. UTT and organisational  structure
and Wareham  (2011);Gredel et al. 2012; Lee  (2012)   4. UTT and organisational  structure    Reappraisal of the organisational  structures           Institutional and regional  considerations  Are structural and institutional arrangements conducive to  collaborative open innovation processes with quadruple helix  stakeholders?         Do certain regions/universities/discipline areas lend themselves more  to collaborative UTT involved quadruple helix stakeh olders?  Siegel et al. (2007); O’Shea et al. (2008);  Carayannis and  Campbell, (2010);  Van Looy (2011); Clausen and Korneliusse  (2012); McAdam et al. (2012); Abreu and Grinevich (2013);  Hewitt -Dundas (2012); Wright (2014); Zahra et al (2014);  Miller et al. (2014)     MacGregor et al. (2010); Hayter (2013); Hughes and Kitson  (2012); Perkmann et al.  (2013); Ivanova (2014);
Forthcoming R&D Management             Role of TTO    What type of enabling governance mechanisms enhance quadruple  helix stakeholder interactions?     How can TTOs support and enhance quadruple helix collaboration for  UTT?      Miller et al. (2014); Carayannis and Rakhmullan (2014);  Seppo et al. (2014)     O’Shea et al. (2005); Siegel et al. (2007); Rothaermel et al.  (2007); Klofsten et al. (2010); Carayannis and Campbell  (2010); Abreu and Grinevich (2013)
Forthcoming R&D Management
Forthcoming R&D Management
Forthcoming R&D Management
A systematic literature review of university technology transfer from a quadruple helix perspective: Towards a research agenda Miller, K., McAdam, R., & McAdam, M. (2016). A systematic literature review of university technology transfer from a quadruple helix perspective: Towards a research agenda. R & D Management . Advance online  publication. https://doi.org/10.1111/radm.12228 Published in: R & D Management Document Version: Peer reviewed version Queen's University Belfast - Research Portal: Link to publication record in Queen's University Belfast Research Portal Publisher rights © 2016 RADMA and John Wiley & Sons Ltd This is the peer reviewed version of the following article: Miller, K., McAdam, R. and McAdam, M. (2016), A systematic literature review of university technology transfer from a quadruple helix perspective: toward a research agenda. R&D Management, which has been published in final form at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/wol1/doi/10.1111/radm.12228/abstract. This article may be used for non-commercial purposes in accordance with Wiley Terms and Conditions for Self-Archiving. General rights Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Queen's University Belfast Research Portal is retained by the author(s) and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights. Take down policy The Research Portal is Queen's institutional repository that provides access to Queen's research output. Every effort has been made to ensure that content in the Research Portal does not infringe any person's rights, or applicable UK laws. If you discover content in the Research Portal that you believe breaches copyright or violates any law, please contact openaccess@qub.ac.uk. Open Access This research has been made openly available by Queen's academics and its Open Research team.  We would love to hear how access to this research benefits you. – Share --- its Open Research team.  We would love to hear how access to this research benefits you. – Share your feedback with us: http://go.qub.ac.uk/oa-feedback Download date:19. jul. 2024 --- Forthcoming R&D Management   Stage 2: Database Search   Two distinct academic databa ses were utilised in order to cross -reference the results and  eliminate the risk of disregarding relevant literature. The first search session was conducted  through the ‘ABI/Inform’ database. ABI/Inform  was chosen as the primary database on account  of it o ffering a comprehensive and wide range of academic entrepreneurship and university  commercialisation li terature , in addition to its  frequent use in systematic literature reviews (e.g.  Becheikh et al., 2006; Djokovic and Souitaris, 2008). Once this initial search was completed ,  it was then repeated using ‘Business Source Premier’ database which has also been used  frequently in systemat ic literature reviews is the industry’s most frequently used research  database (e.g. Pittaway et al., 2004; Djokovic and Souitaris, 2008). For each search, the  keywords from Stage 1 were constructed into search strings which included a combination of  an ar ticle title search. In order to be included, the article had to be published in a peer reviewed  journal  between  1980 and 20 15. The sample size at this stage was 957 articles.         Stage 3: Article Scan / Selection   The aim of stage three  was to refine the s ample identified in stage  two to ensure  the inclusion  of the  most relevant articles. This consisted of three steps, the first of which was to eliminate  any overlapping articles between the databases which reduced the sample size to 457 articles.  Second, th e abstracts of these remaining articles were read to determine their relevance given  our research aim. Out of these 457 articles, 162 articles were downloaded, saved and labelled  in a designated folder (labelled according to author and year of publication)  as being potentially  relevant to this literature review . Third, the bibliographical data of each paper was exported  directly into Refworks for potential future  referencing . Table 1 presents the number --- exported  directly into Refworks for potential future  referencing . Table 1 presents the number of papers  selected in relation to each  search term.   [Insert  Table 1 here] --- Forthcoming R&D Management   Stage 4: Data Extraction   The fourth stage was data extraction. The aim of this stage was to minimize researcher  subjectivity. A standardised data extraction process (Tranfield et al., 2003) by means of a pro - forma form was conducted. The protocol involved recording the journal, author(s), title, year  published, geographical area, research problem/question, theory base, paper type  (descriptive/explanatory/conceptual), methodological approach, data sources, sample type,  sample size, depe ndent variable (quantitative studies only), analysis, key  findings/contributions, any need for further research and a section for recording any additional  comments the reviewer had of the paper. This protocol was carried out for all 1 51 articles which  resulted in a final document of 210 pages (on average 1.5 pages of single spaced data was  extracted for each article). This document provided a raw data repository of the selected  articles.     Stage 5: Data Analysis   The last stage involved importing all the rele vant articles into NVivo 10 to conduct  a process  of open inductive coding (Miles and Huberman, 1994). Each article was opened in turn and  read through NVivo 101. The articles were then coded into free nodes and grouped into tree  nodes (representing open co des and themes/subthemes). To ensure rigor and to increase the  reliability of the coding process, the coding of data was conducted independently by two of the  research  team s with any variances in the codes  discussed until a consensus was achieved. If a  consensus could not be achieved, the third member of the research  team  was consulted.                                                                   1 NVivo 10 is a software tool used to support qualitative and mixed methods research. --- within a regional  setting (Carayannis et al., 2012; Chesbrough, 2007 and 2010; Miller et al, 2014). Fourth, the  user involvement suggests an open innovation approach where knowledge from multiple --- Forthcoming R&D Management   References   Abreu, M., Grinevich, V., Hughes, A. and Kitson, M. (2009), Knowledge Exchange   between Academics and the Business, Public and Third Sectors, Centre for Business   Research, University of Cambridge , Cambridge.   Abreu, M.  and Grinevich, V. (2013) The nature of academic entrepreneurship in the UK:  widening the focus on entrepreneurial activities. Research Policy,  42 (2), 408 -422.  Almirall, E. and Wareham, J. (2011)  Living Labs: Arbiters of mid - and ground -level  innovation. Technology Analysis and Strategic Management 23 (1), 87 -102.  Al-Mubaraki, A., Mubarak, H. and Busier, M. (2013) Business Incubation as an Economic  Development Strategy: A Literature Review. International Journal of Management, 30 (1),  362-367.  Ambos, T. C., Makela, K., Birkinshaw, J. and D'este, P. (2008) When Does University  Research Get Commercialized? Creating Ambidexterity in Research Institutions. Journal of  Management Studies , 45, 1424 -1447.   Arnkil, R., Järvensivu A., Koski, P. and  Piirain en, T. (2010)  Exploring Quadruple Helix –  Outlining user -oriented innovation models. University of Tampere, Institute for Social  Research, Work Research Centre.   Asheim , B.T. and  Coenen , L. (2005 ) Knowledge bases and regional innovation systems:  comparing Nordic clusters. Research Policy,  34 (8), 1173 –90.  Barca, F., McCann, P. and Rodríguez -Pose, A. (2012) The case for regional development  intervention: Place -based versus place -neutral approaches.  Journal of Regional Science, 52 (1),  134-152.   Becheikh, N., Landry, R. and Amara, N. (2006) Lessons from innovation empirical   studies in the manufacturing sector: A systematic review of the literature from   1993 -2003. Technovation, 26, 644 -664.  Bercovitz, J., Feldman, M., Feller, I. and Burton, R. (2001) Organizational Structure as a  Determinant of Academic Patent and Licensing Behavior: An Exploratory Study of Duke,  Johns Hopkins, and Pennsylvania State Universities. --- Behavior: An Exploratory Study of Duke,  Johns Hopkins, and Pennsylvania State Universities. Journal of Technology Transf er, 26 (1- 2), 21 -35.   Bercovitz, J. and Feldman, M. (2008) Academic Entrepreneurs: Organizational Change at the  Individual Level. Organization Science, 19, 69-89.  Bercovitz,  J. and M. P. Feldman. (2006) Entrepreneurial  Universities  and Technology  Transfer:   A Conceptual  Framework  for Understanding  Knowledge -Based  Economic   Development . Journ al of Technology  Transfer , 31(1): 175 -188. --- Forthcoming R&D Management   Bozeman, B. (2000) Technology Transfer and Public Policy: A Review of Research and  Theory. Research Policy , 29 (4), 627 -655.  Bozeman, B., Rimes, H. and  Youtie, J. (2015). The evolving state -of-the-art in technology   transfer research: Revisiting the contingent effectiveness model. Research Policy , 44, 34-49.  Camagni, R. and Capello, R. (2013) Regional Innovation Patterns and the EU Regional Policy  Reform:  Toward Smart Innovation Policies. Growth and Change, 44 (2), 355 -389.   Campbell, E.G., Powers, J.B., Blumenthal, D., Biles, B. (2004) Inside the Triple Helix:  Technology Transfer and Commercialization In The Life Sciences. Health affairs,  23 (1), 64 - 76.   Carayannis, E.G. and Campbell, D.F.J. (2009) “Mode 3” and “Quadruple Helix”: toward a 21st  century fractal innovation ecosystem. International Journal of Technology Management , 46  (3/4), 201 –234.  Carayannis, E.G., Barth, R.D. and Campbell, D.F.J. (2012) The quinuple helix innovation  model: global warming as a challenge and driver for innovation. Journal of Innovation  and  Entrepreneurship , 1, 1–12.  Carayannis, E.G. and Campbell, D.F.G. (2014) Developed democracies versus emerging  autocracies: arts, democracy, and innovation in Quadruple Helix innovation systems . Journal  of Innovation and Entrepreneurship , 3, 12-24.  Carayannis, E.G. and Rakhmatullin, R. (2014) The Quadruple/Quintuple Innovation Helixes  and Smart Specialisation Strategies for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth in Europe and  Beyond.  Journal of the Knowledge Economy,  5 (2), 212 -239.  Chesbrough H. (2007)  Why companies should have open business models. MIT Sloan  Management Review , 48, 22-28.   Cao, Y., Zhao, L. and Chen, R. (2009)  Institutional structure and incentives of technology  transfer. Journal of Technology Management in China , 4 (1), 67 -84.   Chesbrough H. (2011)  Bringing open innovation to services. MIT Sloan Management Review,   52, 85 -91.  Clarysse, B., Tartari, V. and --- innovation to services. MIT Sloan Management Review,   52, 85 -91.  Clarysse, B., Tartari, V. and Salter, A. (2011) The Comparative Role of TTOs and Individual  Level behaviour of Academics to Explain Academic Entrepreneurship. Research Policy , 40  (8), 1084 –1093.   Clausen, T. and Korneliussen, T. (2012) The relationship betw een entrepreneurial orientation  and speed to the market: The case of incubator firms in Norway. Technovation , 32 (9-10), 560 - 567. --- Forthcoming R&D Management   Colapinto, C. and Porlezza, C. (2012) Innovation in Creative Industries: From the Quadruple  Helix Model to the Systems Theory.  Journal of the Knowledge Economy , 3 (4), 343 -33.  Cooke, P. (2005) R egionally asymmetric knowledge capabilities and open innovation  Exploring 'Globalisation 2' - A new  model of industry organisation , Research Policy,   34, 8,  1128 -1149.   Djokovic, D. and Souitaris, V. (2008) Spinouts from academic institutions: a literature review  with suggestions for future research. Journal of Technology Transfer , 33 (3), 225 -247.  Edvardsson, B., T ronvoll, B. and Gruber, T. (2011) Expanding understanding  of service  exchange and value co -creation:  a social construction approach , Academy of Marketing  Science.Journal,   39, 2, 327 -339.  Etzkowitz, H.  (1998) The norms of entrepreneurial science: Cognitive effects of the new  university -industry linkages.  Research Policy , 27 (8), 823 -833.  Etzkowitz, H. (2003) Research groups as 'quasi -firms': The invention of the entrepreneurial  university. Research Policy,  32 (1), 109 -121.  Etzkowitz, H. and Leydesdorff, L. (2000) The dynamics of innovation: from national s ystems  and ‘Mode 2’ to a triple helix of university -industry -government relations. Research Policy , 29  (2), 109 -23.  Etzkowitz, H. and Klofsten, M. (2005) The innovating region: Toward a theory of knowledge  based regional development. R&D Management , 35, 243 –255.   Galbraith, B.  and McAdam, R. (2011) The promise and problem with open innovation.  Technology Analysis and Strategic  Management , 23 (1), 1 –6.  Gibbons, M., Limoges, C., Nowotny, H., Schwar tzman, S., Scott, P., Trow, M. (1994)  The new  production of knowledge: the dynamics of science and research in contemporary societies .  London: Sage.    Goldfard, B. and Henrekson, M. (2003) Bottom -up versus top -down policies towards the  commercialization of university intellectual property. Research Policy , 32 (4), 639 –658 --- the  commercialization of university intellectual property. Research Policy , 32 (4), 639 –658  Gredel, D., Kramer, M. and Bend, B. (2012) Patent -based investment funds as innovation  intermediaries for SMEs: In -depth analysis of reciprocal interactions, motives and fallacies.  Technovation , 32 (9-10), 536 -549.   Grimaldi, R., Kenney, M., Siegel, D. S. and Wright, M. (2011) 30 Years after Bayh -Dole:  Reassessing Academic Entrepreneurship. Research Policy , 40 (8), 1045 -1057.   Guerrero, M., Urbano, D. (2010) The development of an entrepreneurial university. The  Journal  of Technology Transfer , 37 (1), 43 -74. --- Forthcoming R&D Management   Gunasekara, C. (2006) Reframing the Role of Universities in the Development of Regional  Innovation Systems, Journal of Technology Transfer,  31, (1), 101-113.  Hayter, C.S. (2013) Conceptualizing knowledge -based entrepreneurship networks:  perspectives from the literature. Small Business Economics , 41 (4), 899 -911.   Hewitt -Dundas, N. (2012) Research intensity and knowledge transfer activity in UK  Universities.  Research Policy , 41 (2), 262 -275.  Hidalgo, A. and Albors, J. (2008) Innovation management techniques and tools: a re view  from theory and practice. R&D Management , 38 (2), 113 -27.  Hindle, K. and Yencken, J. (2004) Public Research Commercialisation, Entrepreneurship and  New Technology Based Firms: An Integrated Model. Technovation , 24 (10): 793 –803.  HM Treasury. (2003) La mbert review of business -industry collaboration available at:    http://www.hmtreasury.gov.uk/media/9/0/lambert_review_final_450.pdf  (24/03/2011).   Howells, J. Ramlogan, R. a nd Cheng, S.L. (2012) Innovation and University collaboration:  paradox and complexity within the knowledge economy.  Cambridge Journal of Economics,  36  (3), 703 -721.    Hughes, A. and Kitson, M. (2012) Pathways to impact and the strategic role of   universities: new evidence on the breadth and depth of university knowledge exchange in   the UK and the factors constraining its development. Cambridge Journal of   Economics , 36 (3), 723 -750.  Huyghe, A., Knockaert, M., Wright, M. and Piva, E. (2014) Technology transfer offices as  boundary spanners in the pre -spin-off process: the case of a hybrid model. Small Business  Economics, 43, 289 -307.  Ivanova, I. (2014) Quadruple Helix Systems and Symmetry: a Step towards Helix Innovation  System Classification.  Journal of the Knowledge Economy,  5 (2), 357 -369.  Johnston, L., Robinson, S. and Lockett, N. (2010) Recognising ‘open innovation’ in HEI - industry interaction for knowledge transfe r and exchange. International --- ‘open innovation’ in HEI - industry interaction for knowledge transfe r and exchange. International Journal of  Entrepreneurial Behaviour and Research,  16 (6), 540 -60.  Kenney, M. and Mowery, D. (2014)  Public Universities and Regional Development: Insights  from the University of California System. Palo Alto, CA, Stanford University Press.   Klofsten, M., Heydebreck, P., and Jones -Evans, D. (2010) Transferring good practice beyond  organizational borders: Lessons from transferring an entrepreneurship programme. Regional  Studies , 44 (6), 791 -799. --- Forthcoming R&D Management   Kotha, R., George, G. and Srikanth, K. (2012) Bri dging the Mutual Knowledge Gap:  Coordination and the Commercialisation of University Science. Academy of Management   Journal , 56 (2), 498 -524.  Larsen, M.T. (2011) The implications of academic enterprise for public science: An overview  of the empirical evidence. Research Policy , 40 (1), 6 -19.  Lee, P. (2012) Transcending the Tacit Dimension: Patents, Relationships, and Organizational  Integration in  Technology Transfer.  California Law Review,  100 (9), 1035 -1057   Leydesdorff, L. (2011) The Triple Helix, Quadruple Helix, and an N -Tuple of Helices:  Explanatory Models for Analyzing the Knowledge -Based Economy ? Journal of the  Knowledge Economy , 3 (1), 25 -35.  Li, Y., Yi, L., Yi, D. and Li, M. (2008) Entrepreneurial orientation, strategic flexibilities and  indigenous firm innovation in transitional China. International Journal of Technology  Management , 41 (1), 223 -246.  Link, A. N. and Siegel, D. S.  (2005) Generating science -based growth: an econometric analysis  of the impact of organizational incentives on university –industry technology transfer. The  European Journal of Finance , 11, 169 -181.  Lipinski, J., Lester, D.L. and Nicholls, J. (2013) Promoting Social Entrepreneurship:  Harnessing Experiential Learning with Technology Transfer to Create Knowledge Based  Opportunities. Journal of Applied Business Research,  29 (2), 597 -606.   Lu, L. and Etzk owitz, H. (2008) Strategic challenges for creating knowledge -based  innovation in China: transforming triple helix university -government -industry relations.  Journal of Technology Management in China,  3 (1), 5 –11.   MacGregor, S.P. Marques -Gou, P. and Simon -Villar, A. (2010) Gauging Readiness for the  Quadruple Helix:  A Study of 16 European Organisations. Journal of the Knowledge  Economy,  1 (3), 173 -190.  Markman, G.D., Siegel, D.S. and Wright, M. (2008) Research and Technology  Commercialization. Journal of --- G.D., Siegel, D.S. and Wright, M. (2008) Research and Technology  Commercialization. Journal of Management Studies , 45, 1401 -1423.   McAdam, R., Miller, K., McAdam, M. and Teague, S. (2012) The development of University  Technology Transfer stakeholder relationships at a regional level: lessons for the future.  Technovation , 32 (1), 57–67.  Miles, M.B. and Huberman, M. (1994) Qualitative Data Analysis: An expanded Sourcebook.  Sage: London.   Miller,  K., McAdam, M. and McAdam, R. (2014)  The University Business Model: Evolution  and Emergence from a Stakeholder Perspective. R&D Management , 44, 265 -287. --- Forthcoming R&D Management   Mitev, N. and Venters, W. (2009) Reflexive Evaluation of an Academic -Industry Research  Collaboration: Can Mode 2 Management Research be Achieved? The Journal of  Management Studies, 46, (5), 733 -749.   O’Shea, R.P, Allen, T. J., Chevalier, A. and Roche, F. ( 2005) Entrepreneurial orientation,  technology transfer and spinoff performance of U.S. universities. Research Policy,  34, 994 – 1009.   O'Shea, R.P., Chugh, H. and Allen, T.J. (2008) Determinants and consequences of university  spinoff activity: A conceptual f ramework. International Journal of Technology Transfer , 33  (6), 653 –666.  Payumo, J., Gang, Z., Pulumbarit, E., Jones, K., Maredia, K. and Grimes, H. (2012) Managing  intellectual property and technology commercialization: Comparison and analysis of practices,  success stories and lessons learned from public research universities in developing Asia.  Innovation Management, Policy and Practice , 14 (4), 478 -494.   Perkmann, M. and Walsh, K. (2007) University –industry relationships and open innovation:  towards a research agenda. International Journal of Management Reviews,  9 (4), 259 –280.  Perkmann, M., Tartari, V., McKelvey, M., Autio, E., Brostrom, A., D’Este, P., Fini, R., Geuna,  A.,  Grimaldi, R.,  Hughes,A.,  Krabel, S., Kitson, M.,  Llerena, P., Lissoni, F., Salter, A. and  Sobrero, M. (2013) Academic engagement and commercialisation : A review of the literature  on university Industry relations. Research Policy,  42 (2), 423 –442.   Pittaway, L. and Cope, J. (2007) Simulating Entrepreneurial Learning Integrating Experiential  and Collaborative Approaches to Learning. Management Learning , 38 (2), 211 -233.  Plewa, C., Rampersad, G., Johnson, C.R., Baaken, T., MacPherson, G. and Korff, N. (2013).  The evolution of university -industry linkages –A framework. Journal of Engineering and  Technology Management,  30 (1), 21 -44.  Prajapati, V., Tripathy, S. and Dureja, H. (2013) Product lifecycle management through --- 21 -44.  Prajapati, V., Tripathy, S. and Dureja, H. (2013) Product lifecycle management through patents  and regulatory strategies. Journal of Medical Marketing,  13 (3), 171 -180.  Rademakers, M., 2005. Corporate Universities, Driving Force of Knowledge Innovation. The  Journal of Workplace Learning 17 (1), 130 -136.  RIS (2014) National/Regional Innovation Strategies for Smart Specialisation. Cohesion Policy  2014 -2020, European Commission. Available online:  http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/docgener/informat/2014/smart_specialisation_en. pdf (accessed 10/12/2014).   Rothaermel, F.T., Agung, S.D. and Jiang, L. (2007) University entrepreneurship: A taxonom y  of the literature. Industrial and Corporate Change , 16 (4), 691 -791. --- Forthcoming R&D Management   Roxas, S.A., Piroli, G. and Sorrentino, M. (2011) Efficiency and evaluation analysis of a  network of technology transfer brokers. Technology analysis and strategic management , 23  (1), 7 -24.   Savva, N. and Scholtes, S. (2014) Opt -Out Options in New Product Co -development  Partnerships.  Production and Operations Management,  23, (8), 1370 -1386.   Schoonmaker, M.G. and Carayannis, E.G. (2013) Mode 3: A Poposed Classification Scheme  for the Knowledge Economy and Society. Journal of the Knowledge Economy , 4 (4), 56 -577.  Schuurman, D., Lievens, B., De Marez, L. & Ballon, P. 2012, "Innovation from user experience  in Living Labs: revisiting the 'innovation factory' -concept with a panel -based and user -centered  approach", The International Society for Professional Innovation Management (ISPIM),  Manchester, 1 -11.  Scott, S. (2002) Selling university technolog y: Patterns from MIT. Management Science,  48  (1), 122 -137.   Seppo, M., Roigas, K. and Varblane, U. (2014) Governmental Support Measures for  University -Industry Cooperation – Comparative View in Europe. Journal of the Knowledge  Economy,  5 (2), 388 -408.  Siegel, D. S., Veugelers, R. and Wright, M. (2007) Technology Transfer Offices and  Commercialization of University Intellectual Property: Performance and Policy Implications.  Oxford Review of Economic Policy , 23 (4), 640 -660.   Siegel, D.S., Waldman, D.D., Atwater, L.E. and Link, A.N. (2004) Toward a model of the  effective transfer of scientific knowledge from academicians to practitioners: qualitative  evidence from the commercialization of university technologies. Journal of Engineering and  Technology Manag ement , 21, 115 -42.  Starkey, K. and Madden, P.  (2001)  Bridging the Relevanc e Gap: Aligning Stakeholders in   the Future of Management Research. British Journal o f Management , 12, 3-26.  Stokes, D.D. (1997) Pasteur´s Quadrant: basic science and technological innovation.  The  Brookings Institution, --- (1997) Pasteur´s Quadrant: basic science and technological innovation.  The  Brookings Institution, Washington .  Swan, J., Bresnen, M., Robertson, M., Newell, S. and Dopson, S. (2010) When Policy meets  Practice: Colliding Logics and the Challenges of 'Mode 2' Initiatives in the Tr anslation of  Academic Knowledge , Organization Studies, 31 (9), 1311.   Tello, S., Latham, S. and Kijewski, V. (2011) Assessing differences between technology  transfer officers and institutions in the decision to commercialise new technologies.  International Journal of Technology Transfer and Commercialisation , 10 (1), 93 -111. --- Forthcoming R&D Management   Thorpe,  R., Holt, R., MacPherson, A. and Pittaway, L. (2005) Using knowledge within small  and medium -sized firms: A systematic review of the evidence. International Journal of  Management Reviews,  7 (4), 257 -281.  Tödt ling, F. and Trippl, M. (2005) One size fits all? Towards a differentiated regional  innovation policy approach. Research Policy , 34 (1), 1023 -1209.   Tranfield, D., Denyer, D. and Smart, P. (2003) Towards a Methodology for Developing  Evidence -Informed Manag ement Knowledge by Means of Systematic Review. British Journal  of Management, 14 (3), 207 -222.   Tranfield, D. and Starkey, K. (1998)  The nature, social organisation and promotion of  management research: Towards policy. British Journal of Management , 9 (4), 341 -353.  Urbano, D. and Guerrero, M. (2013) Entrepreneurial Universities: Socioeconomic Impacts of  Academic Entrepreneurship in a European Context. Economic Development Quarterly , 27 (1),  40-55.  Van Looy, B., Landoni, P., Callaert, J., van Pottelsberghe, B., Sapsal is, E. and Debackere, K.   (2011) Entrepreneurial effectiveness of European universities: An empirical assessment of  antecedents and trade -offs. Research Policy , 40 (4), 553 -564.  Wilson, T. (2012) A Review of Business –Industry Collab oration. London: Department for  Business, Innovation and Skills. Available at:   https://www.gov.uk/go vernment/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/32383/12 -610- wilson -review -business -university -collaboration.pdf  (accessed 18/12/2014).   Wright , M., Piva , E., Mosey , S. and Lockett , A. (2009) Academic entrepreneurship and  business schools , Journal of Technology Transfer , 34, 560 -587.  Wright, M. (2014) Academic Entrepreneurship, Technology Transfer and Society: Where  Next? Journal of Technology Transfer , 39, 322 -334.  Zahra, S.A. and Wright, M. (2011) Entrepreneurship’s next act. Academy of Management  Perspectives,  25 (4), 67 –83. --- Forthcoming R&D Management   Zahra, S.A. Wright, M. and Abdelgawad, G. (2014) Contextualisation and Advancement of  Entrepreneurship Research. International Small Business Journal,  32, 479 -500.    Figure 1: Knowledge Production Modes and University Knowledge Transfer   Source: Gibbons et al., (1994).     Figure 2: Triple and Quadruple Helix UTT   Source: Adapted from Carayannis and Campbell (2009) --- Forthcoming R&D Management     Figure 3: Trajectory of Entrepreneurial University and UTT Stakeholder Relationship     Table 1: Papers Extracted from Systematic Literature Review --- Forthcoming R&D Management --- Forthcoming R&D Management --- Forthcoming R&D Management
Forthcoming R&D Management   A Systematic Literature Review of University Technology Transfer from a Quadruple  Helix perspective : Towards a research agenda     Abstract   Within recent years, there has been a rapid expansion of the University’s role in economic  development. This has resulted in University Technology Transfer (UTT) taking place within  an increasingly complex network of regional stakeholders. This complexity has resulted in  quadruple helix models where the triple helix model of academia, industry and regional  government  now includes societal based innovation users  as a fourth helix.  Despite this  development,  extant research is fragmented and lacks coherent frameworks and  conceptualisations which fully depict the dynamic and evolving nature of UTT. Accordingly,  this pape r reviews  Mode 2 UTT from a quadruple helix perspective to identify key themes to   develop a research agenda which reflects progression from a triple into a quadruple helix  ecosystem.    Keywords : Systematic Literature Review ; Quadruple Helix; University Technology Transfer ;  Triple Helix; Technology Commercialisation; End Users     1.0 Introduction   Collaboration between government, academia and industry is considered to be of critical  importance in University Technology Transfer (UTT) in enhancing regional economic and  social development (Klofsten et al., 2010 ; Urbano and Guerrero, 2013); with the interplay  between these three institutional spheres forming the crux of the well -established Triple Helix  Model of UTT (Etzkowitz and Leydesd orff, 2000). However, in recent years, the effectiveness  of this model has been questioned, as regions have failed to meet expected levels of UTT in  terms of innovation, GDP and employment  (Asheim and Coenen, 2005; McAdam et al., --- Forthcoming R&D Management   2012).  In order to address  this challenge , recent policy initiatives identify the need for more  open and co -creational UTT involving societal based innovation user stakeholders leading to a  complex network of quadruple helix stakeholders involved at various stages throughout the  UTT process (Wilson, 2012; RIS, 2014). The inclusion of the fourth helix depicting societal  based innovation users (Leydesdorff, 2011; Carayannis et al., 2012) and the subsequent  emergence of quadruple helix structures reflect Bozeman et al.’s (2015) review demonstrating  the increasing importance placed on  public valued or societal led UTT.     Despite this , current UTT theory lacks coherent frameworks and conceptualisations which fully  depict this evolving nature of quadruple helix theory and resulting structures. Whilst  comprehensive literature reviews have been conducted , to date (Bozeman, 2000; O’Shea et al.,  2005; Djokovic and Souitaris, 2008; Rothaermel et al., 2007) they tend to focus on a particular  aspect of UTT  and fail to fully encapsulate the dynamic and evolving nature of UTT which is  embedded in an increasingly complex network of  stakeholders  innovation -user stakeholders  seeking to influence the development of UTT in addition to that of receiving innovation  outcomes.  In fact, n o reviews to date have explored the impact quadruple helix on UTT.     Given the wide and expanding scope of UTT , it is necessary in the first instance to  define what  is meant by UTT  within criteria based limits to guide th is literature review. Etzkowitz and  Leydesdorff (2000:  118) argue that UTT can defined based on Gibbons et al . (1994) Mode 1  and Mode 2 theory of knowledge production as shown in Figure 1.   [Insert figure 1 here]     Using  Mitev and Venters (2009) and Swan et al .’s (2010) interpretation  in a UTT contex t,  Mode 1 UTT  refers to the traditional  role of Universities  in developing basic research leading --- Forthcoming R&D Management   to societal learning and education . Mode 2 UTT, the focus of this paper, refers to Universities ’  newer role in UTT  activities leading to the commercialisation of technology. Building  on this,  Hughes  and Kitson ( 2012 ), Abreu et al . (2009) and Carayannis and Campbell (2009) refer to   idea of Mode 3 which encapsulates  University knowledge exchange involving a wide range of  University – community knowledge exchange including training and development. Mode 2   UTT is distinguishable from traditional research in Universities (Mode 1), due to its relevance  to practice (Starke y and Madan, 2001) or the context of application (Tranfield and Starkey,  1998). Consistent with Gibbons  et al.’s (1994) definition of “ Mode 2” knowledge production  (i.e. Figure 1), Universities are seen as key actors or organisations in national innovation  systems. Within such systems, universities are vehicles for technology transfer and a conduit  through which knowledge exchange is made more effective (Cao et al., 2009). Resultant  entities include, in addition to IP,  licensing, patenting,  spin -out companies and spin -in  companies into university incubators and other technology bridge foundations or  intermediaries (Bercovitz and Feldman, 2006) which support the codification and  commercialisation of knowledge in the university context for commercialisation purposes  (Rademakers, 2005). Further maturation of such entities may result in expansion and growth  leading to relocation in University or Government Science Parks. Throughout the paper we  adopt the term ‘Mode 2 UTT’ as referring to University based Mode 2 knowledge production  through UTT  with a view towards commercialisation.     To enhance coherence between recent policy and practice, the aim of this paper is to critically  review Mode 2 UTT from a quadruple helix perspective and  to identify key themes and future  research agendas. The next section will discuss the systematic literature --- key themes and future  research agendas. The next section will discuss the systematic literature review (SLR)  methodology followed. The core findings will then be presented from which four key themes  are delineated. These themes are then synthe sised and future research agendas are suggested. --- Forthcoming R&D Management   2.0 Review  Methodology   The methodology incorporated a SLR of double -blind peer -reviewed academic journal articles  relating to the progression of UTT from a relatively closed system, to a triple helix and then on  to a quadruple helix context. The importance of a structured and mu ltiple -stage system for  reviewing a large volume of academic literature is well acknowledged and as a consequence  was deemed appropriate given the aim of this paper (Thorpe et al., 2005; Pittaway and Cope,  2007). The adoption of SLR proved instrumental in developing a robust and holistic collation  of the developments of UTT over the past 34 years (i.e. since the introduction of the Bayh - Dole Act). Details of the Five Stage SLR followed are given below.     Stage 1: Keyword search   Research on Mode 2 UTT is voluminous and multidisciplinary  (Carayannis and Campbell,  2009). Thus, in order to define the boundaries of the subject, recognised  experts in the area  namely academics, technology transfer office staff and  principal investigator s were consulted  to identify suitable keyword search terms.     Since the focus of this paper is Mode 2 UTT from a quadruple helix perspective , it was deemed  appropriate to use all -encompassing search terms to initially review the topic in a holistic  manner rather than taking each stage as an individual component. This approach resulted in  five core search terms deemed valid by the experts consulted, namely “ technology  commercialisation  and universities”, “technology -based entrepreneurship and universities” ,  “academic enterprise and universities”, “Triple Helix and universities”  and “ Quadruple Helix   and universities”. --- Forthcoming R&D Management   3.0 Contextual Background -The emergence of the UTT quadruple helix model.   In order to aid contextualisation of the SLR  and to add meaning to the themes presented in  section 4, a trajectory of UTT spanning 30 years illustrating the antecedents which lead to the  emergence the UTT quadruple helix model is presented in Figure 2.   [Insert F igure 2 here]   It is clear from the SLR that over the past three decades, collaboration between university,  government and industry has evolved considerably (Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff, 2000; Miller  et al., 2014). This evolution is in part due to a combination of globalisation and regionalisa tion  in economic development (McAdam et al., 2012) with increased pressure from government on  universities to take a more proactive role in regional and societal development (Rothaermel et  al., 2007; Grimaldi et al., 2011). It is evident that the UTT Tripl e Helix Model is essentially an  innovation -push model where innovation is seen as originating in academia, for example from  technology disclosure, leading to the development of technology ( Bercovitz and Feldman,  2006; Etzo kowitz and Klofsten, 2005 ) aided b y Government funding support and Industry  (private sector) investment. Resultant entities such as spin out companies then seek out  potential markets and customers for the technology -based products thus creating the innovation  push effect within the Triple Helix model as identified by Gunasekara (2006). However, this  innovation push model of Mode 2 UTT has been increasingly critiqued as failing to produce  expected results in terms of increased innovation, GDP and job creation due to its lack of  societal base d innovation -user involvement (Asheim and Coenen, 2005; Edvardsson et al.,  2011; McAdam et al, 2012). Furthermore, Scholtes, (2013) and Prajapati et al., (2013)  refer to  the excessive development costs and cycle times due to the closed nature of the proces s. h --- Forthcoming R&D Management   In acknowledgment  of this, studies from the mid 2000’s onwards refer to the increased  pressure  from government on Universities to seek and secure funding from non -Government sources  leading to a heightened focus on Mode 2 UTT as a revenue stream for U niversities (Lipinski  et al., 2013). This required and subsequently resulted in closer interaction with regional  stakeholders. Whilst the role of an ‘extended peer user community’ in technology  commercialisation for disciplines such as biotechnology and na notechnology has been noted  since the early 2000’s (Ivanova, 2014), it was not until 2009 that Carayannis and Campbell  posited a quadruple helix innovation system, with “societal based innovation users” more fully  integrated into the innovation processes a s both innovation users and as influencing the Mode  2 UTT process at all stages of development. The inclusion of the fourth helix reflects the  development and increasing complexity and change of modern economic systems which  suggests that the triple helix is not sufficient to ensure long term sustainable growth  (MacGregor et al., 2010; Ivanova, 2014). Figure 3 presents the transition from triple to  quadruple helix structures.    [Insert figure 3 here]   The inclusion of this fourth helix challenges Mode 2 UTT in a number of ways. First, societal  based innovation users are seen as potentially being involved in a co -creational manner  throughout the Mode 2 UTT process rather than simply being passive end recipients  (Edvardsson et al., 2011; Chesbrough, 2011). Thus , they create an innovation -pull effect within  UTT. Second, they are defined also as stakeholders reflecting their committed involvement and  mutual influence and participation throughout the UTT process. Third, they are representative  of societal need and thus can increase the relevance of UTT and a University within a regional  setting (Carayannis et al., 2012; Chesbrough, 2007 and 2010; Miller et al, --- Forthcoming R&D Management   stakeholders is exchanged throughout the UTT process rather than the more closed Triple Helix  approach (Johnston et al., 2010). Kenney and Mowery (2014), Arnkil et al., (2010) and Cooke  (2005) suggest that from an Open Innovation perspective, the normative and  primarily closed  innovation Triple Helix -based knowledge transfer process adds to internalisation rather than  exploring more diverse forms of knowledge as sources of innovation (Cooke, 2005;   Carayannis and Rakhmatullin, 2014). Fifth, the closed innovatio n approach to UTT  commercialisation is becoming prohibitively expensive and hence knowledge from societal  based innovation user stakeholders becomes more attractive (Savva and Scholtes, 2013)  leading to potentially shorter development cycle times (Prajapat i et. al., 2013).   2009 onwards witnessed  an increasing number of articles exploring the emergence of the  quadruple helix however these  articles largely undertake a macro perspective which  emphasises that the quadruple helix is an agenda largely driven from the top down with limited  research exploring the impact of quadruple helix structures on the Mode 2 UTT process. For  example, Schoonm aker and Carayannis’s (2013) study identify that most universities operating  within a regional network appear to be still operating within triple helix structures despite  national government innovation policy stressing the need to develop collaborative ent ities with  societal based innovation users to produce more market relevant technology based products.  However, it was noted that a small minority of firms show signs of operating within quadruple  helix structures identifying a filtering down to Mode 2 UTT process levels. A study by  MacGregor et al., (2010) looked at the Quadruple Helix readiness of 16 European cities and  identifies that challenges lie at both a regional and sector level. Science -based industry sectors  were identified as ‘quadruple helix rea dy’ due --- and sector level. Science -based industry sectors  were identified as ‘quadruple helix rea dy’ due to their research departments and absorptive  capacity which aid the bridging of basic research from universities (Mode 1) into their  innovation processes (Mode 2). However, it was identified that regions with a dominance of  companies in less techno logy intensive areas often innovate in -house in a closed manner and --- Forthcoming R&D Management   are less likely to have the required absorptive capacity or motivation to collaborate with  universities. Carayannis and Rakhmaullin (2014) identify that variances across regions  promotes q uadruple helix structures where there is a need to formulate smart specialisation  platforms in order to promote engagement between institutions to build on regional strengths.  In this context, Smart Specialisation refers to regions within Europe specialisi ng in specific  technologies that have regional relevance and hence exerts an innovation pull influence on the  Mode 2 UTT process consistent with the Quadruple Helix model. In sum, it is evident that  despite the limited studies exploring quadruple helix to date, it is emergent in nature which is  going to have profound effects on Mode 2 UTT and raises challenges which need to be  identified and addressed to aid its development. Overall , Schuurman et al., (2012); Ivanova,  (2014); Arnkil et al., (2010) and Caray annis and Rakhmatulin (2014)  suggest the emergence  of the quadruple helix model challenges the approach to UTT and Mode 2 UTT in particular,  moving to a more complex and open based view of innovation involving the two way  involvement of influencing stakeho lders throughout all stages of the Mode 2 UTT process  Thus, it is evident that the implications of the emergence of the quadruple helix is of sufficient  importance as to warrant a critique of the existing Mode 2 UTT literature from a quadruple  helix perspe ctive to show key themes and research agendas.   4.0 Key Emergent Themes   The SLR literature review led to f our main themes being identified as being critical to  understanding the impact that the emergence  quadruple helix structures  has had on UTT which  provides the basis for  future research agendas . These findings in relation to each theme are  shown in sub sections ( 4.1 – 4.4). --- Forthcoming R&D Management   4.1 Theme 1: Tension between basic research and commercialisation   An emergent key theme which has implications for the transition from a triple to quadruple  helix models within Mode 2 UTT  relates to the tensions arising between the various  stakeholders which are now more complex with the addition of societal based innova tion users  and their involvement in the UTT process. The literature suggests that there is a need to identify  and manage these tensions to help advance UTT research and practice agendas (Hughes and  Kitson, 2012; Al -Mubaraki et al., 2013). According to the Lambert’s Report (HM Treasury,  2003: 14) “ companies and universities are not natural partners ”. This lack of affinity has  resulted in tension and conflict throughout the history and process of UTT (Larsen, 2011)  which is likely to increase in a quadruple helix context due to the increased involvement of the  societal based stakeholders often with d iverse agendas. Prior attempts to minimise such tension  and conflict have resulted in legislation, the most significant being the Bayh -Dole Act (1980)  in the USA, which as mentioned, created opportunities for Academic Entrepreneurs to benefit  from their IP , patenting and licensing. However, critics including Goldfard and Henrekson  (2003) acknowledge that the technology push implicit in the Bayh -Dole Act may lead to  limitations in commercial viability of spin -out firm’s products due to a lack of initial, or at least  delayed emphasis on market pull and an over -reliance on technology push. This may have  implications on the objectives of academics versus those of societal based innovation users as  represented in the quadruple helix model where market pull is inc reased.   A significant empirical study by Larsen (2011) notes that a disincentive to would -be academic  entrepreneurs is that basic research is often more cited than applied research, where citations  is a mark of academic esteem. For example --- often more cited than applied research, where citations  is a mark of academic esteem. For example , Ambos et al. (2 008) and Huyghe et al. (2014)  suggest that this tension is manifested at an individual level with the academic having difficulty  in reconciling these polarities ultimately requiring separate or ambidextrous structures and --- Forthcoming R&D Management   career paths as Mode 2 UTT becomes  increasingly complex due to quadruple helix model  influences. Bercovitz and Feldman’s (2008) and Link and Siegel’s (2005) identify that  resolving the tension depends on local social factors such as training and culture and incentives  related to UTT especi ally in times of significant change such as in the emergence of the  quadruple helix model.   O’Shea et al. (2008) echo this challenge and stress that there are  substantial differences in an individual academic’s ability to publish and engage in academic  enterprise with a range of stakeholders, as is the case in the Quadruple Helix Model, with only  a limited number being capable of successfully operating across the divide. Stokes (1997)  suggests that these tensions can be shown in a classification with axes of fundamental  understanding versus consideration of use. Building on Stokes q uadrant analysis, Larsen  (2011) suggests the need for Universities to dynamically shift towards Pasteur’s quadrant i.e.  maximising both fundamental knowledge contribution and societal use as stressed in the  quadruple helix model. Furthermore, Clausen and K orneliusse (2012) suggest that senior  management should recognise and drive this process at a Mode 2 UTT level by setting effective  strategy and incentives, where the context is likely to be unique for each University due to  variations in societal based innovation user stakeholders with diverse Smart Specialisation  regional strategies, with a contingent, rather than best practice Mode 2 UTT approach  necessitated.   Overall, the emergence of the quadruple helix structure with societal based innovation user  stakeholders is likely to further highlight the tension between basic and applied research with  the need for further significant allocation of resources to meaningfully progress the increased  management demands of operating a Mode 2 UTT quadruple helix model. --- Forthcoming R&D Management   4.2 Theme 2: Developing Stakeholder Relationships   A considerable amount of the Mode 2 UTT literature to date, relates to a mechanistic science - based technology push approach to technology development, however Colapinto and Porlezza  (2012) identify that a quadruple helix system depends on not only ‘hard’ infrastructures but  that the ‘soft infrastructure s’ based on societal based innovation user stakeholder interactions  (networking, knowledge transfer, human capital) are just, if not more important. Payumo  et  al.’s (2012) University case analysis suggests that Mode 2 UTT consists of bundles of policies  which depend upon people interactions and partnerships. These tacit people -based UTT  conduits can also lead to risk and uncertainty due to cultural and insti tutional bias across diverse  stakeholders which ultimately limit UTT effectiveness especially where a wider range of  societal stakeholders are involved as in the quadruple helix model (Lee, 2012).   Hidalgo and Albors (2008) and Plewa et al., (201 3) note th at a core element of the Mode 2  UTT processes, especially in a quadruple helix context, is the ability to manage stakeholder  relationships strategically. Miller et al., (2014) and McAdam et al., (2012) apply stakeholder  theory to explore the transitioning entrepreneurial university  and identify that this increasingly  open process raises issues in relation to the ability to manage multiple stakeholders objectives  and often competing interests in a Mode 2 UTT quadruple helix setting. In particular, these  studies identify that power re source relationships exist with UTT stakeholders whereby  stakeholders will use withholding or usage strategies in order to exert their salience and achieve  their own objectives. These may conflict with academic stakeholders whose agendas are more  focussed primarily on obtaining resources to carry out research rather than on  commercialisation as identified by Perkmann et al . --- resources to carry out research rather than on  commercialisation as identified by Perkmann et al . (2013). Whilst the influence multiple  stakeholders have on UTT is not new, this has only been discussed in a passive nature (Hidalgo  and Albors, 2008). --- Forthcoming R&D Management   It is noted within the literature that quadruple stakeholder groups encapsulate stakeholders  which are both regional (Todtling and Trippl, 2005; Ivanova, 2014) and organisational (i.e.  organisational type) (Van Looy et al., 2011; Hewitt -Dundas, 2012) specific. Whilst core UTT  activities and structural mechanisms across universities and regions may look similar,  Galbraith and McAdam (2013) note that the interaction and relationships between these diverse  stakeholders in a Quadruple Helix se tting as a result of contextual factors will vary and may  significantly affect UTT outcomes.   One of the most important people based aspects for a functioning quadruple helix is the quality  of academic entrepreneurs (MacGregor et al., 2010; Miller et al., 2014). Extant research   identifies that there are multiple, often conflicting demands on the academic entrepreneur’s  time (Perkmann et al., 2013). Given the considerable distance between typical industry and  academic knowledge frontiers, i.e. between academ ics and societal based innovation user  stakeholders,  significant effort is required  in coordination (Rothaermel et al., 2007; Perkmann  and Walsh, 2007; Kotha et al., 2012). The academic or Principal Investigator (PI) is a core  component in the UTT process  and whilst all academics possess expert knowledge in their area,  many academics vary in relation to their entrepreneurial attitudes and ability to engage with a  wider range of stakeholders in the quadruple helix setting  (Bozeman, 2000; Clarysse et al.,  2011 ; Urbano and Guerrero, 2013) . Indeed, Perkmann et al. (2013) identify that engagement  with industry and societal based end users is reliant upon individual characteristics of  academics such as demographics, career trajectory, productivity and motivatio n. Furthermore,  organisational factors such as technology transfer support, formal incentives, department  quality and department climate may impact upon willingness and --- formal incentives, department  quality and department climate may impact upon willingness and ability of academics to  engage with industry and end users. --- Forthcoming R&D Management   In sum, university polices and structures need to encourage the engagement of quadruple helix  stakeholders in Mode 2 UTT, with a recognition that engagement levels will vary across  university types.  Furthermore, it is evident that many academics still do not possess the skills,  ability and motivation to network and interact effectively with societal based innovation users  in a co -creational manner ( MacGregor et al., 2010; Miller et al., 2014 ) which may hinder the  realisation of quadruple helix implementation in Mode 2 UTT settings.   4.3 Theme 3: UTT Performance Measures and Entities   Mode 2 UTT performance measures have mainly focused on the output of entities such as  patents, licenses, spin -outs, job creation (Payumo et al., 2012; Al -Mubaraki et al., 2013).  However, Tello et al. (2011) suggest that these limited UTT performance measur es can instil a  bounded rationality, especially in the more open innovation pull setting of the Quadruple Helix  model. Campbell et al. (2004) suggest that UTT performance measurements are emergent in  nature as a result of on-going  change in the external en vironment and that many measures are  not adequately recorded such as tacit based activity costs and effectiveness which are  significant when universities are operating within complex stakeholder relationships as in the  quadruple helix context (Carayannis a nd Campbell, 2014). However, Grimaldi et al., (2011)  and Clausen and Korneliussen (2012) suggest that contextual performance measures such as  institutional and geographic factors involving regional stakeholders as societal based  innovation users (Hayter, 2 013) are required as opposed to  a “one size fit all” approach.  Moreover, Hughes and Kitson (2012) suggest that performance measurement in UTT (in  addressing both Mode 2 and Mode 3 UTT)  should consider constraints by scientific discipline:   Health Sciences (culture); Science, Technology, Engineering and Maths (STEM) --- discipline:   Health Sciences (culture); Science, Technology, Engineering and Maths (STEM) (costs,  resources, partner identification, agreement on IP), Arts and Humanities (lack of time, rewards  and poor marketing) and Social Sciences (bureaucratic, lack of resources, timescales, lack of --- Forthcoming R&D Management   experience and culture). These constraints may impinge on the ability of certain disciplines to  fully integrate societal based innovation users in quadruple helix contexts into their UTT  processes which supports research by MacGregor et  al., (2010) who question certain region’s  readiness for the quadruple helix depending on industry sector predominance.    A reoccurring theme in Mode 2 UTT performance measurement throughout the literature is the  challenges surrounding IP which is made more  complex in a quadruple helix context when  multiple stakeholders are collaborating.  Larsen (2011) suggests that IP may actually limit  openness and publishing by academic entrepreneurs as the IP patenting process can take  considerable time in comparison to  fast moving scientific fields. This need for protection may  contrast with the ‘first mover’ strategy of a societal based innovation user. Moreover, the  complexity and legal aspects of IP usually require in -house or external experts, and are beyond  the cur rent expertise of academic entrepreneurs. In some cases, Patent -based Investment Funds  (PBIFs) are established (Gredel et al., 2012), which essentially commoditize patents as  investments (Lee, 2012) where Galbraith and McAdam (2011: 4) suggest that “mini e bays for  technology and IP” are created. Larsen (2011) suggest that patenting is only a small part of  Mode 2 UTT and its measurability (e.g. invention disclosures, number of patent applications,  domestic patents granted) obscures other important Mode 2 UTT  measures arising from  managing quadruple helix based stakeholder interactions such as societal impact. There has  been a trend towards ‘easy access IP’ for certain technologies to be exploited to have benefit  to society and the economy however, many univer sities policies still require IP to be protected  which will cause challenges when engaging in more co -creational Mode 2 UTT with industry  and societal based end users. --- when engaging in more co -creational Mode 2 UTT with industry  and societal based end users.   An emergent field over the last five years relates to the emergence of entities referre d to as  intermediaries for Mode 2 UTT (Roxas et al., 2011; Gredel et al., 2012). Etzkowitz (2003) --- Forthcoming R&D Management   suggests that intermediaries often form at the interface of key junctures within the UTT process  where Lee (2012: 1569) suggests they obscure these boundaries  in a positive manner to  improve connections, integration and knowledge transfer between stakeholders such as  industry and societal based innovation users. Thus they are “ bounded knowledge commons ”  involving networks from across UTT interfaces, interacting in a co -creational manner to  increase Mode 2 UTT and thus are consistent with the Quadruple Helix model.    Hindle and Yencken (2004) suggest that intermediaries reflect entrepreneurship within Mode  2 UTT in that an entrepreneur can be viewed as an “in -between taker” i.e. availing of interface  and cross boundary opportunities created by the inclusion of societal based innovation users.  Examples of intermediaries entities and evidence of embracing th e role of societal based  innovation users in Mode 2 UTT is seen in Almirall and Wareham’s  (2011) study of Living  Labs where pre -commercial procurement with early user involvement was found to advance  technology development at early or pre -incubation stages  of the UTT process in an innovation  pull manner consistent with the quadruple innovation model. Almirall and Wareham  (2011)   identify processes of knowledge sensing and early prototyping in covering tacit, experiential  and domain based knowledge (i.e. adding knowledge codification on the tacit -explicit  knowledge continuum). Moreover, they suggest that living labs help to obtain  critical mass for  product creation within the UTT process through co -creational inputs from a diverse range of  societal  based  innovation users throughout the Mode 2 UTT process stages. Another example  of intermediary Mode 2 UTT entities is that of platfor m formation (Gredel et al., 2012). Typical  examples are technology trading platforms and integrated project management platforms which  help connect societal based innovation --- platforms and integrated project management platforms which  help connect societal based innovation user stakeholders and universities and are a base for  service provision to the Mode 2 UTT process at critical development junctures. --- Forthcoming R&D Management   Thus , research shows that intermediaries appear to be effective structures for embracing the  emergence of quadruple helix structures within regions however, research in this area is  emergent. Overall Mode 2 UTT performance measurement and entities are likely to undergo  further transformation as Mode 2 UTT shifts towards the more complex operating environment  of the quadruple helix model.   4.4 Theme 4: UTT and Organisational Structure   In addition to discrete UTT entities, the literature also refers to the overall UTT organisational  structure as a key theme which can be critiqued from a Quadruple Helix perspective. Ideally,  in order to incorporate  the inclusion  of the fourth helix , organ isational structure development  must be integrative in nature as Mode 2 UTT from a quadruple helix perspective is a joint  production effort involving co -creational and coordinated effort involving a range of  stakeholders to perform complex tasks (Kotha et al., 2012).   Most UTT is embryonic and requires significant further work for successful commercialisation  (Kotha et al., 2012). MacGregor et al., (2010) stress that local government need to be realistic  about what entrepreneurial activities a region and st akeholders within that region can engage  with. Indeed, this is evident with the emergence of the Smart Specialisation strategy which  emphasises building on unique regional strengths (Carayannis and Rakhmatullin, 2014). In  addition, Howells et al. (2012) id entify that many industry firms have a lack of willingness to  collaborate with universities despite the push for quadruple helix models. Johnston et al.,  (2010) identify the importance of creating an environment where there is open knowledge  transfer and e xchange between Mode 2 UTT stakeholders so that effective relationships can  emerge as in the quadruple helix context. --- Forthcoming R&D Management   The emergence of quadruple helix societal based innovation user stakeholders  will have  particular implications for the role of the Technology Transfer Office (TTO) in the UTT  organisational structure. Numerous studies from 2000 onwards, explored the TTO where the  organisational structure (Bercovitz et al., 2001), capabilities and resources of the TTO has been  found to impact the effectiveness of UTT (O’Shea et al., 2005; Siegel et al., 2007), However,  the quality of TTO officers has been documented as being a barrier to UTT activities  (Rothaermel et al., 2007; Siegel et al., 2007) since this can lead to missed opportunities  particularly when dealing with numerous stakeholders from varying contexts. Research by  Abreu and Grinevich (2013) identify that TTOs recruit a mix of employees with scientific and  business backgrounds in order t o have a competent and complementary pool of staff. However,  in practice, smaller TTOs, often have limited resources (financial and human) which means  they are lacking broad management and technical skills and knowledge of markets to  effectively engage wit h multiple societal based innovation user stakeholders especially in a co - creational manner within the quadruple helix context (Carayannis and Campbell, 2010; Siegel  et al., 2007; O’Shea et al., 2008). Such limitations can result in academics and industry  questioning the competency of the TTO (Siegel et al., 2004; Klofsten et al., 2010) with a  detrimental effect on commercialisation levels and success (Siegel et al., 2007).      Carayannis and Rakhmullan (2014) identify that successful innovation between quad ruple  helix stakeholders cannot be expected without appropriate governance structures in both  regions and within institutions. They suggest the need for various new enabling roles which  sponsor the infrastructure needed to help stakeholders interact. In su m, it is evident that  effective support measures and appropriate --- help stakeholders interact. In su m, it is evident that  effective support measures and appropriate organisational structures are needed to enhance  quadruple helix based interactions in driving the Mode 2 UTT process (Seppo et al. 2014). --- Forthcoming R&D Management   5.0 Transition of UTT from a triple to quadruple helix: A Research Agenda   It is evident from the previous discussion that Mode 2 UTT is gradually progressing from  operating within a triple helix structure to a quadruple helix perspective. H owever, research  exploring Mode 2 UTT within th e increasingly complex network of quadruple helix   stakeholder interactions is in its infancy (Miller et al., 2014; Wright, 2014; Ivanova, 2014) with  empirical studies only beginning to emerge in the last four years. The evolving nature of UTT  has meant that UTT theory and c onceptualisation is still emergent and lacks an overarching  theoretical position or framework (Plewa et al., 2013 ; Zahra et al., 2014). Moreover , the  emergence of the quadruple helix interpretation of UTT presents a number of challenges to  those working in the area of UTT. Since our aim in this paper is to establish a research agenda,  we now identify a number of future research avenues and indicati ve research questions (see  Table 2) which may aid future research and practice of Mode 2 UTT operating within a  quadruple helix framework .  Table 2 about here   The theme of tension between basic research and commercialisation is a re -occurring theme  which can be found in past literature reviews on Mode 2 UTT (Bozeman, 2000; Rothaermel et  al., 2007) . It is evident from existing studies that future research needs to u ndertake contextual  based approaches to exploring this tension where, the type of university and their  corresponding culture may provide unique challenges in relation to engagement with more  collaborative and co -creational stakeholders emerging from the qu adruple helix model . This is  particularly relevant for research intensive universities whose internal promotional  mechanisms may favour  research publication (Van Looy et al., 2011; Hewitt -Dundas, 2012).  Indeed, there is a need to explore how systems are de veloped to address and balance --- 2012).  Indeed, there is a need to explore how systems are de veloped to address and balance  institutional need  to engage more fully with quadruple helix stakeholders and individual --- Forthcoming R&D Management   University staff preferences (Al -Mubaraki et al. , 2013). It is recommended that in order to  motivate academics to engage in collaborativ e UTT  as increasingly required in the quadruple  helix model , further research is needed to probe how conflict can be avoided to the mutual  benefit of basic research and UTT commercialisation and to address what Etzkowitz (2003)  refers to as a blurred area of study.   Studies suggests that Mode 2 UTT is increasingly  becoming an iterative and messy people  based process due to the co -creational and  societal based  innovation user aspects of the  quadruple helix model (Hindle and Yencken, 2004; Lee, 2012; Payumo et al., 2012). However,  there is limited understanding of th e softer side of UTT as a premise for creating  and managing   resultant multiple collaborative  UTT processes and entities (Wilson, 2012; Colapinto and  Porlezza, 2012). Indeed, there is a lack of research exploring issues of trust, relationship  building and t acit knowledge sharing to reflect the increasing complex ‘people’ based aspects  of Mode 2 UTT operating within a quadruple helix ecosystem (Lee, 2012; Payumo et al., 2012).  Furthermore, it is suggested that future research should explore the underlying culture,  objectives and management practices of the institutions involved (e.g. the Quadruple  Helix of  academia, Government, industry and societal based innovation users ) in order to extend  knowledge and understanding of potential conflict and aid understanding of interventions on  how to overcome such conflict (Li et al. , 2008; Plewa et al., 2013 ).  In addition, there is a need  to recognise the important role the academic entrepreneur plays in impacting the success of  quadruple helix stakeholder engagement in UTT ( Miller et al., 2014 ). Future research needs to  explore how internal mechanisms, polic ies and structures can be designed to motivate  academics to engage more collaboratively with industry and --- structures can be designed to motivate  academics to engage more collaboratively with industry and societal based innovation users.   Furthermore, there  is a need for future research to determine commonalties and differences  between stakeholders perc eptions of more collaborative Mode 2 UTT  (Siegel et al. , 2004;  Galbraith and McAdam, 2011) which according to Tello et al. (2011) will help define the --- Forthcoming R&D Management   decision making process within Mode 2 UTT and aid knowledge flow towards shorter  commercialisation  cycle  times .   Whilst the process of Mode 2 UTT has been explored in detail in the past from a triple helix  perspective (Bozeman, 2000;  Rothaermel et al., 2007; Guerrero and Urbano, 2010 ), the  addition of societal based innovation users  from the quadruple helix model presents the need  for new performance mechanisms, processes and entities to reflect more collaborative and co - creational UTT (Miller et al., 2014). It is evident that there is a need for future studies to explore  a move away  from the formalised, structured , innovation  push  and relatively closed processes  to business models and entities which are more flexible, iterative and open (Galbraith and  McAdam, 2011; Colapinto and Porlezza, 2012) .  In terms of UTT process flow, we propose future research on institutional mechanisms (e.g.  from triple and quadruple helix constituencies) which must be in place to support and guide a  more collaborative UTT process at appropriate junctures or points of need (e.g. funding stages,  incentiv es and authorisation mechanisms) (Campbell et al. , 2004; Payumo et al. , 2012).  Consistent with McAdam  et al. (2012) it is suggested that more research on process mapping  representations of Mode 2 UTT incorporating people, culture and institutional issues i s needed  to clarify the increasingly complex UTT processes involving participation from numerous  societal based innovation user stakeholders  with an increased emphasis on innovation pull.   Furthermore, it is not clear, how professional practices and standar ds (e.g. quality) can be  integrated within Mode 2 UTT to reduce process uncertainty and variability if quadruple helix  stakeholders are involved in co -creating technologies (Carayannis and Rakhmullan, 2014). In  order to accurately explore UTT process flow barriers and enablers, there is a need for  longitudinal case --- accurately explore UTT process flow barriers and enablers, there is a need for  longitudinal case based research where existing documented process maps may have been  superseded with more formal tacit process activities reflecting the integration of additional --- Forthcoming R&D Management   external stakeholders within the quadruple helix model (Campbell et al. 2004; Hindle and  Yencken, 2004; Wright, 2014).   Mode 2 UTT process performance measures have mainly focused on numbers of patents,  licenses, spin -outs, job creation and funding as dominant measures in the innovatio n push based  triple helix model (Al-Mubaraki et al., 2013; Payumo et al., 2012). However, concurring with  Tello et al. (2010) it is suggested that these limited UTT performance measures can instil a  bounded rationality with a consequent need for further re search on a wider range of potential  UTT performance measures reflecting more open innovation approaches characteristic of  quadruple helix structures (Perkmann and Walsh, 2007; Miller et al., 2014). With the changing  policy and practice to reflect operatin g within quadruple helix structures, UTT performance  measurements are emerge nt in nature with many measures  not being adequately addressed  such  as tacit based activity costs and effectiveness, thus there is a need for more fine grained UTT  performance meas ures (Campbell et al. 2004; Tello et al., 2010; Al -Mubaraki et al., 2013).  Furthermore, as mentioned, contextual sets of performance measures (institutional and  geographic) differing societal based innovation users are needed rather than assuming a best  practice set can be established (Clausen and Korneliussen, 2012; Hayter, 2013) which suggests  the need for more case -based research.   In relation to UTT entities, there have been sustained and prolonged calls for further research  into alternative UTT channels  and models  (Scott, 2002; Tello et al., 2010; Hughes and Kitson,  2012). While patenting and licensing have been widely explored in the literature, their defacto  status of representing UTT is again an example of bounded rationality (Tello et al., 20 10) which  does not account for changes in stakeholder relationships evident in the emergence of  quadruple helix --- not account for changes in stakeholder relationships evident in the emergence of  quadruple helix stakeholders. --- Forthcoming R&D Management   Living labs and competency research centres have emerged as successful examples of  intermediaries comprising of quadruple helix en tities where they provide mechanisms for  effective communication  between quadruple helix stakeholders improving technology  development and market viability in a co -creational manner (Almirall and Wareham, 2011).  However, their role in UTT is lacking depth of understanding illustrating that further research  into their structure, operation and performance is needed ( Almirall and Wareham, 2011; Gredel  et al., 2012). Furthermore, concurring with Roxas et al. (2011) and Galbraith and McAdam  (2011) it is suggested there is a need for further research on the performance and effectiveness  of intermediaries by taking a contextual approach where intermediaries in Mode 2 UTT are  likely to vary across Uni versities and regions reflecting unique capabilities  of societal based  innovation users within the quadruple helix model .   In relation to UTT organisational structure, Etzkowitz (1998) argues that the loci of scientific  knowledge has moved from the “ivory tower” towards entrepreneurial science which is a  progressive interplay of cognitive opportunities, institutional rearrangements and normative  change. This statement is even more significant currently given the progression to the  quadruple helix model . Cur rent UTT policy assumes interaction between quadruple helix  stakeholders will naturally happen however, as Arnkil et al. (2010) notes, policy only creates  conducive conditions and which may differ substantially from practice. Future research is  needed ther efore in order to gain a more nuanced understanding of how to create collaborative  and co -ordinated environments with multiple diverse stakeholders interacting as  suggested in  the quadruple helix model (O’Shea et al., 2008; Kotha et al., 2012).  Furthermore  in terms of  organisational structure  the TTO faced significant challenges as a --- Furthermore  in terms of  organisational structure  the TTO faced significant challenges as a result of limited resources  (Sharma et al., 2006). With the inclusion of societal based innovation user stakeholders , it is  anticipated that these challenges may intensify. Con sequently, further research is needed into  how TTO staff attempt to develop a broad set of boundary spanning skills including marketing, --- Forthcoming R&D Management   technical and negotiating capabilities which will bridge collaboration between quadruple helix  stakeholders (Wright et al., 2009). Furthermore, future research should explore how TTOs can  effectively balance the objectives of different stakeholders particularly with the emergence of  additional stakeholders within a quadruple helix model  (Clarysse et al., 2011; Miller  et al.,  2014) who can allocate  expenditure and resources available for technology commercialisation  activities.     6.0 Conclusion   Given the recent importance place on the inclusion  of societal based innovation users in policy  initiatives  and the emergence of  such in practice , the aim of this paper wa s to critically review  Mode 2 UTT from a quadruple helix perspective and to identify key themes and future research  agendas. The aim of this paper was to critically review the Mode 2 UTT literature from a  quadruple  helix perspective  to identify future research.  Given the changing role of universities  in society (Lu and Etzkowitz, 2008; Urbano and Guerrero, 2013) requiring closer interaction  between quadruple helix stakeholders (Wilson, 2012; RIS, 2014) and a focus o n leveraging  regional strengths through smart specialisation (Barca et al., 2012; Camagni and Capello,  2013), this review is timely in order to help understand the increasing complexity of Mode 2  UTT  through the emergence of the quadruple helix model .   On the basis of the SLR we proposes a research agenda ( Table 2) which will aid both practical  and theoretical conceptualisations of the range of issues facing Mode 2 UTT operating within  quadruple helix structures. It is evident that historical issues with un iversities involvement in  UTT still remain a challenge . Accordingly,  the need to engage in more open and collaborative  Mode 2 UTT with quadruple helix stakeholders  will not only intensif y existing challenges but  also presents new challenges. W ith the evolving nature of UTT --- intensif y existing challenges but  also presents new challenges. W ith the evolving nature of UTT into more collaborative --- Forthcoming R&D Management   networked stakeholder relationships  consistent with the quadruple helix model there is a need  for new conceptualisations and models to understand  and help manage  the increasing  complexity of Mode 2 UTT (Perkmann and Walsh, 2007; Rothaermel et al., 2007; Urbano and  Guerrero, 2013; Carayannis and Rakhmatullin, 2014). Indeed, changing organisational and  contextual factors resurface past challenges which warrant further exploration and refinement  in ligh t of chang es as a result of  the emergence of the quadruple helix model . From the SLR, it  was found that closer collaboration of societal based innovation user  stakeholders identifies  the  need to not only re-develop Mode 2 UTT processes (Colapinto and Porlezza, 2012; Miller et  al., 2014)  but the need to align institutional culture, department climate, performance  mechanisms and support mechanisms throughout the university to meet this goal .    It is evident that research exploring the challenges of quadr uple helix models  is still in its  infancy (Zahra and Wright, 2011; Schoonmaker and Carayannis, 2013; Seppo et al., 2014) with  existing research predominantly at the macro level reflecting a need for more longitudinal and  case based research at micro levels  to fully understand its complexity (Wright, 2014). The  suggestions for futur e research agendas contribute  to both theory and  practice by identifying  the core issues which need to be explored to ease transition into operating within a quadruple  helix model . Whilst a structured SLR was undertaken, UTT is a vast and complex process (e.g.  Modes 1 – 3) thus the issues identified by focussing on Mode 2 UTT are not exhaustive of the  far reaching challenges a quadruple helix model  poses. However, the discussion and  subsequent future research agendas show how current and emergent themes in Mode 2 UTT  can be further explored in terms of potential research questions at a theme and sub-theme level.  The research --- explored in terms of potential research questions at a theme and sub-theme level.  The research questions are sufficiently bro ad as to warrant further sharpening and focusing for  any given future study relating to UTT within the complex networks of stakeholder  relationships  in quadruple helix models . --- Forthcoming R&D Management   Table 2: Agenda for Future Research   Theme  Sub theme  Example Research Questions  References   1. Tension  between basic  research and  commercialisation  Research versus Publishing  Conflicts                   Polarities of research and UTT       Negative outcomes of Bayh -Dole  Act   What mechanisms (e.g. incentives, training) can help balance basic  research and co -creational technology commercialisation with industry  and societal based end users?         How do contextual issues (e.g. University type and culture) impact  collaborative research activities with quadruple helix stakeholders?       What environmental changes are needed to a chieve Pasteur’s  quadrant?     What directions should future enabling legislation take in order to  facilitate collaborative UTT with quadruple helix stakeholders?    Bozeman (2000); Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff (2000);  Campbell et al. (2004); Link and Siegel (2005); Bercovitz  and Feldman, (2008); Perkmann and Walsh, (2007); O’Shea  et al. (2008); Larsen (2011); Hughes and Kitson (2012); Al  Murabaki et al. (2013)     MacGregor et al. (2010); Daskalopoulou et al. (2010); Van  Looy (2011); Hewitt -Dunda, (2012); Galbra ith and  McAdam (2013); Ivanova (2014)     Larsen (2011); Clausen and Korneliusse (2012)       Sharma et al. (2006); Bercovitz and Feldman (2006);  Perkmann and Walsh (2007); Grimaldi (2007); Miller et al.  (2014)   2. Developing Stakeholder  Relationships  People base d aspects of UTT         Balancing conflict               Academic Engagement  How can ‘softer’ infrastructures and social integration mechanisms be  set up to enhance relationship building and knowledge transfer  between quadruple helix stakeholders?     How can perceptions  and objectives of quadruple helix stakeholders be  aligned to reduce conflict during UTT?     How do contextual factors influence university engagement with  quadruple helix stakeholders?     What internal mechanisms, policies and structures will --- with  quadruple helix stakeholders?     What internal mechanisms, policies and structures will motivate  academi cs to engage more with industry and societal based end users  (e.g. career stage, incentives, department climate)?  Colapinto and Porlezza (2012);Lee, (2012); Payumo et al.  (2012); Miller et al. (2015)       Hidalgo and Albors (2008); Plewa et al. (2012); McAdam  et  al. 2012; Miller et al. (2014)     MacGregor et al. (2010); Clausen and Korneliussen (2012);  Galbraith and McAdam (2013); Miller et al. (2014); Ivanova  (2014); McAdam et al. (2015)     Markmann et al. (2008); Perkmann and Walsh (2007);  Kotha et al. (2012); P erkmann et al. (2013); Urbano and  Guerrero (2013) --- Forthcoming R&D Management     Theme  Sub theme  Further Research Areas  References   3. UTT Performance  Measures and Entities                              UTT and process uncertainty.         UTT process flow dynamics         UTT process performance  measurement.                 UTT Models and Intermediaries  Does the integration of end users in the UTT process enhance or reduce  uncertainty?       How do UTT processes interact with quadruple helix stakeholders at key  process junctures?       Will performance measures be able to balance the needs and priorities  of each quadruple helix stakeholder?     How can tacit -based activity costs and effectiveness or quadruple helix  stakeholder collaboration during UTT be measured?       How do institutional and geographic factors impact upon quadr uple  helix stakeholder engagement during Mode 2 UTT?     What models of UTT allow more effective engagement with quadruple  helix stakeholders overcoming IP issues and conflicting objectives?     What type of intermediaries at core UTT junctures are needed to  increase quadruple helix stakeholder engagement?      Almirall and Wareham (2011); Galbraith and McAdam  (2013); Lee (2012); Siegel et al. (2012)       Siegel et al. (2012); Plewa et al. (2013); Wright (2014);  Zahra et al. (2014); Miler et al. (2014); Seppo et al. ( 2014)       Tello et al. (2011); Plewa et al. (2013); Wright (2014);  Zahra et al. (2014); Miller et al. (2014); Seppo et al. (2014)     Almirall and Wareham (2011); Arnkil et al. (2010); Lee  (2012); Perkmann et al.(2013) Carayannis and Campbell  (2014)     Grimaldi et al. (2011); McAdam et al. (2015); Clausen and  Korneliussen (2012); Hayter (2013);Ivanova (2014)     Arnkil et al. (2010); Mac Gregor et al. (2010); Larsen  (2011); Galbraith and McAdam (2011); Miller et al. (2014);     Etzkowitz (2003);  Hindle and Yencken (2004)  Roxas et al.,  2011; Almirall and Wareham  (2011);Gredel et al. 2012; Lee  (2012)   4. UTT and organisational  structure --- and Wareham  (2011);Gredel et al. 2012; Lee  (2012)   4. UTT and organisational  structure    Reappraisal of the organisational  structures           Institutional and regional  considerations  Are structural and institutional arrangements conducive to  collaborative open innovation processes with quadruple helix  stakeholders?         Do certain regions/universities/discipline areas lend themselves more  to collaborative UTT involved quadruple helix stakeh olders?  Siegel et al. (2007); O’Shea et al. (2008);  Carayannis and  Campbell, (2010);  Van Looy (2011); Clausen and Korneliusse  (2012); McAdam et al. (2012); Abreu and Grinevich (2013);  Hewitt -Dundas (2012); Wright (2014); Zahra et al (2014);  Miller et al. (2014)     MacGregor et al. (2010); Hayter (2013); Hughes and Kitson  (2012); Perkmann et al.  (2013); Ivanova (2014); --- Forthcoming R&D Management             Role of TTO    What type of enabling governance mechanisms enhance quadruple  helix stakeholder interactions?     How can TTOs support and enhance quadruple helix collaboration for  UTT?      Miller et al. (2014); Carayannis and Rakhmullan (2014);  Seppo et al. (2014)     O’Shea et al. (2005); Siegel et al. (2007); Rothaermel et al.  (2007); Klofsten et al. (2010); Carayannis and Campbell  (2010); Abreu and Grinevich (2013)
El artículo "A systematic literature review of university technology transfer from a quadruple helix perspective: Towards a research agenda" de Miller, K., McAdam, R., & McAdam, M. (2016) se enfoca en revisar de manera sistemática la transferencia de tecnología universitaria desde una perspectiva de cuádruple hélice. El estudio utilizó las bases de datos académicas ABI/Inform y Business Source Premier para garantizar la exhaustividad de la revisión, identificando inicialmente 957 artículos y reduciéndolos a 457 en la etapa de selección.

En la etapa de extracción de datos, se siguió un proceso estandarizado para minimizar la subjetividad del investigador, registrando información detallada de cada artículo. Se extrajeron datos de 151 artículos, resultando en un documento final de 210 páginas.

En la etapa de análisis de datos, se utilizó NVivo 10 para realizar una codificación inductiva abierta de todos los artículos relevantes. La codificación se realizó de forma independiente por dos miembros del equipo de investigación para aumentar la fiabilidad.

El estudio destaca la importancia de las relaciones entre las universidades y las partes interesadas en la transferencia de tecnología, así como la evolución de los modelos de innovación en la cuádruple hélice. Se resalta la necesidad de investigaciones futuras para comprender mejor estos procesos y sus implicaciones en la sociedad.

En conclusión, la revisión de la Transferencia de Tecnología Universitaria (UTT) del Modo 2 desde una perspectiva de cuádruple hélice ha identificado temas clave y agendas de investigación futura. La transición de un modelo de triple a cuádruple hélice presenta desafíos y oportunidades para la UTT. La agenda de investigación propuesta incluye explorar las tensiones entre la investigación básica y la comercialización, desarrollar relaciones con las partes interesadas, reevaluar las medidas de desempeño y entidades de UTT, y reevaluar las estructuras organizativas de UTT. La investigación futura debería centrarse en factores contextuales, dinámicas de proceso, medición de desempeño y el papel de las Oficinas de Transferencia de Tecnología (TTOs) en facilitar la colaboración de cuádruple hélice en UTT. Esta investigación contribuirá a una mejor comprensión de la naturaleza evolutiva de la UTT dentro de redes complejas de partes interesadas en modelos de cuádruple hélice.
