Vol.:(0123456789)Review of Managerial Science https://doi.org/10.1007/s11846-024-00745-1 1 3 ORIGINAL PAPER Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive  review of agile approaches adopting contingency  and configuration theories Stefano Magistretti1  · Daniel Trabucchi1  Received: 19 May 2023 / Accepted: 14 February 2024  © The Author(s) 2024 Abstract Today’s world requires new approaches to innovation that leverage continuous test- ing and pivoting. Speed and the ability to respond to exogenous shocks are becoming  increasingly important in both theory and practice. Following the introduction of the  Agile Manifesto in 2001, a wide range of industries have adopted agile approaches,  which differ from other ways of managing innovation projects by promoting flex- ibility and the rapid development of new solutions. Despite the proliferation of agile  approaches across industries, the literature lacks a systematic understanding of their  underlying elements. Therefore, we conduct a systematic literature review using a  text mining technique to longitudinally explore the evolutionary dynamics of the  field. Analyzing the results through the dichotomous lens of contingency and con- figuration theories, we show that the agile literature can be systematized into two  perspectives: agile-as-a-tool in the contingency perspective, and agile-as-a-culture  in the configuration perspective. Our review reveals underexplored intersections in  the field of innovation and provides interesting insights into these two perspectives.  We also propose a research agenda to shed light on these emerging perspectives in  the agile innovation and management literature. Keywords Agile · Agile approaches · Configuration · Contingency · Innovation ·  Flexibility JEL Classification M10 · O30 · O31  * Stefano Magistretti   stefano.magistretti@polimi.it  Daniel Trabucchi   daniel.trabucchi@polimi.it 1 School of Management, Politecnico di Milano, Via Lambruschini, 4B 20156 Milano, Italy
S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 1 Introduction The term agile is not only a buzzword in many academic fields (Grass et al. 2020)  but is also considered a relevant approach for managing innovation (Cooper and  Sommer 2016a, 2018; Sharma et al. 2022). Indeed, in a world where competition is  increasing (Micheli et al. 2019; Trabucchi et al. 2019; Bellis et al. 2022) and man- aging uncertainty is crucial (MacCormack et al. 2001; Conforto et al. 2014, 2016;  Conz et al. 2020), approaches based on the ability of firms to implement dynamism  (Teece et al. 2016; Ghosh et al. 2021) and agility (Bianchi et al. 2022) are needed.  Therefore, it is important for both practitioners and scholars to better understand  what agile means and how it can be used to drive innovation, digital transformation,  and management activities in general. Several approaches and methods that leverage agility have emerged in the practi- tioner world in recent years. These agile approaches emphasize the role of iteration  and learning mechanisms to cope with the complexity of a world that cannot be eas- ily predicted (Tuomi 2012; Magistretti et al. 2023). For example, General Electric  proposed the FastWorks framework as an agile approach (Euchner 2017), Amazon  introduced the press release method to develop innovations with customers, adopt- ing iteration and agility as the fuel of innovation (Pisano 2015), and Spotify showed  that agility is not just a process, but also relevant at the level of the firm’s culture  (Bäcklander 2019). These are just a few examples of the proliferation of agile  approaches and principles in organizations. Indeed, the Harvard Business Review  database shows the relevance of agile approaches in the practitioner domain with  over 1.500 articles, books, and case studies on how agile is permeating the business  and management world. In addition, Harvard Business Review published a book in  2020 that distills the insights from this plethora of publications to give
published a book in  2020 that distills the insights from this plethora of publications to give managers  some guidance on how to embrace agile (Rigby et al. 2020). Therefore, the interest  in this topic is undeniable and evident in both the practitioner and academic worlds. The first seminal work was the Agile Manifesto by Beck et al. published in 2001,  which summarized the agile approach in 12 principles and is considered a milestone  (Paluch et al. 2020). Among others, it emphasizes the role of people over processes,  work over documentation, collaboration over contracts, and flexibility over planning  (Cooper and Sommer 2016a, b). Over the years, other paradigms based on similar  principles have emerged in different domains, such as design (Mansoori et al. 2019),  business model innovation (Ghezzi 2019; Jovanovic et al. 2021; Sanasi et al. 2022),  and digital transformation (Guinan et al. 2019; Chirumalla 2021; Ghosh et al. 2021). As the literature is vast and scattered, a comprehensive review would allow  understanding the fundamental elements of agile approaches and highlight the  under-researched areas. However, to the best of our knowledge, no systematic lit- erature review covers the agile field from a temporal and evolutionary perspec- tive, bridging the gap between an interpretation of the approach in practice and  innovation management theories. This is important because such a review could  inform practitioners about the evolution of the approach and help them to better  exploit the potential of the agile approach. For researchers, it can highlight what  we know and do not know about agile approaches and help expand the field with
1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…future research. Hence, we aim to answer the following research question: What  are the different interpretations and the underlying dimensions of agile over time? To this end, we conduct a review of the agile literature over time. For the defi- nition of agile approaches, we follow Beck et al. (2001), later discussed in Paluch  et al. (2020), based on: (i) iteration, (ii) high unpredictability, (iii) time-box con- straints, and (iv) continuous interaction with customers. To analyse the agile lit- erature, we employ a text mining technique for systematic literature reviews fol- lowing Biesenthal and Wilden (2014) and Randhawa et al. (2016). In line with  the research guidelines for setting inclusion and exclusion criteria (Tranfield et al.  2003; Sauer and Seuring 2023), we collected a database of articles related to the  agile field. To delve deeper into the database and discuss the findings, we con- sider contingency and configuration theories (Doty et al. 1993; Delery and Doty  1996). In particular, these organizational theories help us discuss and understand  the underlying components and elements of the agile literature. In addition, these  theories show that different multidimensional constellations of conceptually  distinct factors can give rise to different frameworks (Meyer et al. 1993). First,  researchers who view agile approaches from a contingency perspective (Miller  1981; Calantone et al. 2003; Gama et al. 2021) emphasize the generalizability of  the approaches and their prominence in academic communities. Second, a more  holistic mode of inquiry has naturally exposed the configurational dimension of  agile adoption (Miles et al. 1978; Pullen et al. 2012). In reviewing the articles, agile-as-a-culture emerged as a perspective influ- enced by organizational dimensions and a configurational lens (Miles et al. 1978;  Pullen et  al. 2012; Bäcklander 2019; Hoonsopon and Puriwat 2019; Huikkola
(Miles et al. 1978;  Pullen et  al. 2012; Bäcklander 2019; Hoonsopon and Puriwat 2019; Huikkola  et al. 2021; Vrontis et al. 2023). Instead, agile-as-a-tool synthesizes the literature  on processes and activities to implement agility in innovation through the lens  of contingency theory (Miller 1981; Calantone et al. 2003; Cooper and Sommer  2016a, b; Pellizzoni et al. 2019; Gama et al. 2021). Moreover, this theoretical lens  has helped to unveil understudied areas. For example, our literature review shows  that articles dealing with agile-as-a-culture take a holistic view of the organiza- tional dimensions of agility, but what happens to the components of agile-as-a- culture in a reductionist perspective remains under-researched. In particular,  reductionism is a research approach that tends to look at the individual dimen- sions and constituents of an organization (Meyer et al. 1993). Similarly, the review shows that it is unclear what type of configuration might  be generated when agile is viewed in a configuration perspective and part of the  agile-as-a-tool cluster. Thus, our review benefits practitioners and scholars by  showing that agile is not only a tool to support innovation under uncertainty or  changing the organizational culture, but also in in-between situations. This tool- culture dichotomy appears to be a common way of recognizing different perspec- tives in the agile literature, which may influence the adoption of the agile innova- tion principles. As other scholars report, diverse and sometimes conflicting views  are common in academic research (Suddaby 2010; Micheli et  al. 2019; Magis- tretti et al. 2021). Nevertheless, different definitions of the same construct may  hinder the understanding and adoption of the agile methodology itself. Therefore,
S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 a clear definition resulting from the systematization of the literature can mitigate  this issue and promote the growth of knowledge (Kraus et al. 2022). 2  Theoretical lenses to study agile approaches Innovation approaches are characterized by different combinations of design and  contextual factors that influence the way the approach is configured in the organi- zation (Mintzberg 1979, 1983). Indeed, it is crucial for the efficiency of processes  and approaches that different configurations support equifinality (Doty et al. 1993).  Equifinality is the theoretical assumption that different forms can be equally effec- tive (Drazin and Van de Ven 1985). The debate about different types of configura- tions has grown over the years, and the role of configuration theory in management  is beyond doubt (Korotka and Bos-Nehles 2016; Zhang et  al. 2017; Myers 2018;  Thornton et  al. 2019). Nevertheless, configuration theory is always compared to  contingency theory. Indeed, the former is concerned with a more holistic under - standing of a phenomenon, the latter with a more reductionist analysis (Meyer et al.  1993). This aspect, together with the fact that another underlying assumption is that  contingency theory looks for aggregations of components (Meyer et  al. 1993), is  interesting as a theoretical lens for the investigation of agile where this dichotomy  has been noted but not discussed in depth. In contrast, configuration theory looks at the strong cohesion of the construct,  showing how this theoretical lens can support delving into the agile literature (Miller  2018; Yan et al. 2019). Finally, the debate around the two theories also shows that  contingency looks for effectiveness determined by the situational context, while con- figuration theory aims to achieve equifinality regardless of the types of configuration  highlighted by the research (Doty et al. 1993). Thus, we aim to better understand the  agile approaches by
by the research (Doty et al. 1993). Thus, we aim to better understand the  agile approaches by searching within the academic debate for constructs that share  the tendency of agile to be considered more effective as a contingency or configura- tion approach. From examining existing knowledge about agile and linking it to contingency and  configuration theories, some preliminary insights emerge. First, the Agile Manifesto  (Beck et al. 2001) clarifies that people involved in agile projects have more account- ability, which is determined by the situational context in which they are immersed.  This is evident when considering the accountability that a developer has in the defi- nition-of-done in a scrum project (Spagnoletti et al. 2021). Second, agile approaches  show that flexibility can increase innovation and help to better respond to changes  in a specific context (MacCormack et al. 2001). Flexibility is intended as an organi- zation’s ability to adapt to the environment and change the design of the solution  according to evolving information (Verganti 1999). These first two examples show a  typical contingency perspective characterized by reductionism, contextual influence,  and quasi-stationary equilibrium (i.e., the tendency to study phenomena as if in equi- librium or moving towards it). On the other hand, what has emerged from the agile  literature is that to embrace agile principles, organizations should work holistically  at the firm level rather than at the process level. Indeed, if flexibility is not a feature  at the organizational level, its benefits and impact are lower (Buganza and Verganti
1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…2006). As such, when culture is examined, a configuration approach to agile seems  to emerge. This dyadic view of agile also seems to be supported in a recent special  issue of the Journal of Business Research, where the guest editors emphasized this  view of agile as a contingency or holistic (configuration) perspective. The editorial  by Paluch et al. (2020) shows that the first three articles focused on contingent inves- tigations of agile (Dziallas 2020; Ghezzi and Cavallo 2020; Bianchi et  al. 2020),  while the remaining three took a more holistic and thus a configuration perspective  (Annosi et al. 2020; Fecher et al. 2020; Mills et al. 2020). The need to better understand the interrelationships between these two perspec- tives led us to delve deeper into the literature. As the initial findings show that the  agile approaches can be read according to contingency and configuration theories  (Miles et al. 1978), this review aims to enrich our knowledge of the agile approaches  in the literature using these theories in a longitudinal perspective to unveil the  essence of the agile approaches and inform future research. 3  Methodology 3.1  Review criteria In this section, we describe the approach used to review the agile literature. To con- duct the review, we adopted and adapted the systematic review principles of the  identification phase proposed by Tranfield et  al. (2003) and subsequently imple- mented by different scholars (e.g., Savino et al. 2017; Ghezzi et al. 2018; Calabrò  et al. 2019; Lim et al. 2022). Our data collection process is based on the assumption  that there are predefined stages to follow to collect and cluster different scientific  contributions (Kraus et al. 2020). This structured approach ensures transparency and replicability (Snyder 2019;  Kraus et al. 2024), and informs future researchers in the field of agile approaches.  The process consists of five steps and is reported
researchers in the field of agile approaches.  The process consists of five steps and is reported next. First, we delved into the agile literature to find the boundaries of the research  scope. This first divergent moment was crucial to understand the overarching area  in which the systematic literature review should be positioned. Given the goal of  disentangling a broad topic, we chose the Scopus database because it allowed us to  include more articles and be less stringent in the initial search (Keupp et al. 2012;  Pangarso et al. 2022; Gama and Magistretti 2023). Second, we identified a set of more than ten keywords that we could potentially use  to search the repository and to find interesting contributions. These keywords were  refined in iterative cycles among the authors to agree on the framing of the search.  We used the final set of keywords (Table  1) to search within Scopus. In particular, the  keywords belonging to category A are central to the field of agile approaches, while  category B helps to better describe the field. As mentioned, the field is strongly char - acterized by agility, flexibility, and lean approaches, but the individual words may be  misleading due to their general meaning. Thus, we searched within categories A and B  with an OR relationship between the constructs, while to better define the limits of the  search, we compiled the two categories with an AND logic (e.g., agile innovation/lean
S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 development). The decision to limit the two categories to a small, albeit fairly broad, set  of keywords was related to the objective of this literature review. A more focused set of  keywords would have limited the collected articles to a smaller area, thus excluding the  diversity of agile approaches from the analysis. Third, we restricted the search to articles written in English and downloadable in  full-text, excluding working papers, editorials, research notes and commentaries, inter - views, dissertation abstracts, books, book chapters, and conference proceedings (Keupp  et al. 2012). There is consensus among scholars that these types of articles have higher  value than those in non-academic peer-reviewed journals (Ordanini et al. 2008; Podsa- koff et al. 2005). Moreover, given the focus on contingency and configuration theories  as defined in the business literature, we limited the subject area to business, manage- ment, and accounting. Fourth, given that the agile approach is a growing stream and its boom is associated  with the introduction of the agile principles in the Agile Manifesto in 2001, we decided  to systematically review the literature starting from 2002 when the business, manage- ment, and accounting literature began to look at it to understand how these principles  might be associated with other innovation approaches. The literature shows the increase  in agile approaches to manage innovation in a more agile, flexible, and lean way, where  the goal is to execute solutions quickly to increase learning and accept failure. Because  these principles were adopted by only a few organizations before 2001, reviewing  these articles would have led to misleading conclusions. We conducted our search up  to July 2020, namely 20 years of research published after the introduction of the Agile  Manifesto. Fifth, considering that the two categories and the start of the search in 2002 did not  limit the area of investigation
the two categories and the start of the search in 2002 did not  limit the area of investigation in terms of the management field, we also introduced a  set of keywords adopting an AND NOT logic. This is because we realized that although  category B focuses on the innovation and new product/service development perspec- tives, the search added many articles from other management areas not relevant for our  review. Therefore, we excluded articles that dealt with the environment, operations,  production, sustainability, electricity, energy, urban, and supply chains. This five-step process is the formal procedure that brought the initial dataset of  153,118 articles to 3527, as shown in Table 2 . 3.2  Data analysis We first analyzed these 3,527 articles using text mining. This technique can pro- vide conceptual insights through an unstructured ontological discovery based on  words for an unbiased and content-driven review of the literature (e.g., Biesenthal Table 1  Keywords used to  perform the searchCategory A Category B Agil* Innovation Flex* Development Lean Project Management
1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive… Table 2  Steps followed to reach the final article dataset Initial article dataset Language Document type Subject area Years Perspective Screening with the Keywords  defined in Table 1Limited to English Limited to Articles (Published  and in Press)Limited to Business Management  and AccountingStarting from 2002 Exclusion: Environment Operations Production Supply Chain 156.765 156.500 79.095 8.310 6.642 3.527
S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 and Wilden 2014; Randhawa et al. 2016). We used the textual data mining software  Leximancer 4.0, in line with studies in the field of product and innovation manage- ment (e.g., Randhawa et al. 2016). Leximancer uses a Bayesian learning algorithm that performs a bootstrap analy - sis, considering an extended list of related terms that signify a concept from the  text data. This type of analysis has been shown to be consistent with expert judg- ment (Campbell et al. 2011; Rooney 2005). The algorithm highlights the most fre- quent concepts and defines their relationships. It starts with the identification of seed  words (through the thematic analysis of documents), which are then linked by co- occurrence and frequency in their context based on semantic analysis (Mathies and  Burford 2011). Previous systematic literature reviews have used text mining analysis to reveal  differences between different subsamples of the overall dataset. For example, Rand- hawa et al. (2016) use multiple time frames to show the evolution of the field. In our  case, the text mining analysis supports the longitudinal study of research developed  from 2002 to 2020. Figures  3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 show the results of this analysis,  where dots represent concepts (collections of words with related meanings) and cir - cles represent themes, which are aggregations of related concepts. The brightness of  the circle indicates the importance of the themes, while the distance between con- cepts indicates how related they are. We use these analyses to untangle the vast body  of knowledge that has been developed over the years. 4  Results This section presents the first descriptive analysis of the dataset, followed by  detailed views of the elements that emerged from the text mining over the time hori- zon considered. 4.1  Descriptive analysis Before presenting the detailed results of the systematic literature review, we provide  some descriptive information about the
results of the systematic literature review, we provide  some descriptive information about the dataset. Figure  1 shows the most represented  journals (more than 20 articles in the sample) and the two main strands: innova- tion and project management. Indeed, project management journals (e.g., Interna- tional Journal of Project Management or International Journal of Managing Projects  in Business) and innovation journals (e.g., Technological Forecasting and Social  Change and Journal of Product Innovation Management) have the highest number of  papers in the dataset. The contributions are well distributed over time (Fig.  2), with three local peaks:  2008, 2014, and 2019 (to date). This suggests that agile approaches were a hot topic  at the beginning of the century (mainly referring to flexibility), and that these topics  have received even more attention from scholars in recent years.
1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…Since the numbers are high throughout the period, we provide a detailed analysis  in 3-year windows (2002–2004, 2005–2007, 2008–2010, 2011–2013, 2014–2016,  and 2017–2020) to highlight the trends and shifts over time. 4.2  2002–2004 At the beginning of the century, research in the field of agile approaches was mainly  driven by two themes: development and flexibility (Fig.  3). Development includes as  concepts and keywords models, R&D, process, and product, which strongly recall 01020304050607080Most frequent journals in the sample Fig. 1  Most frequent journals in the sample 050100150200250300350400 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020Papers published over time Fig. 2  Papers published over time
S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 the traditional elements of the new product development process. The emergence of  development as a concept with a strong focus on processes, interactions, and models  reinforces the traditional view of agile as a process-oriented approach. At the time of the Agile Manifesto (Beck et al. 2001), a novel paradigm in new  product development was emerging that challenged stage-gate as the dominant  design (Cooper 1990). This led to the second concept in the literature, flexibility.  Flexibility includes words such as knowledge and innovation as precursors to these  models. Technology seems to act as the primary enabler of such changes, along with  a strategic market need (within the firm concept). Most cited papers in these years  refer to market needs that push towards modular products and processes to increase  the fit between new product development and customer demands (Worren et  al.  2002). Overall, customers and market dynamics are seen as more uncertain, hence  the growing need for methods and practices to deal with them (Sommer and Loch  2004). These needs seem to be supported by digital technologies, which at the time  appeared to hold great promise for creating new organizational forms, for exam- ple, enabling virtual teams, and changing development processes (Powell et  al.  2004). However, the rapid response demanded by the market also posed significant  Fig. 3  Text mining analysis 2002–2004
1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…challenges to the way people worked and behaved in organizations (Joshi and  Sharma 2004; Galbraith 2002). On the one hand, the development process is a cen- tral theme, and on the other hand, researchers point out that agile approaches tend to  emphasize the critical role of relationships between individuals and creating dense  networks that embed a strong sense of belonging (Schoemaker 2003), namely the  human side of agile. 4.3  2005–2007 The central theme in this period (Fig.  4) remains development, with ancillary themes  such as flexibility, product, and models echoing the previous years. Researchers continued the discussion that started between 2002 and 2004 by con- sidering technology as a key factor in driving and enabling the creation of a new  development process. Uncertainty around innovation projects continued to increase  and new project management approaches were required (Atkinson et al. 2006). From  a process perspective, the dimensions of improvisation (simultaneous planning and  executing) and unlearning (changing routines) to face newly emerging needs that  could not be met with what was previously learned (Akgün et al. 2007) began to  gain importance. In addition, the role of customers and their greater involvement in  development started to emerge (Sawhney et al. 2005). Scholars began paying atten- tion to flexibility in a broader perspective. First, the concept of flexibility started to  be highly considered even outside of software development (Buganza and Verganti  2006), mainly due to the growing importance of customer-centricity and the intro- duction of topics such personalization (Buhalis and O’Connor 2005). New evidence  suggested that flexibility needed to move from the front end to the entire lifecycle  (Buganza and Verganti 2006). In this scenario, specific capabilities such as speed  and responsiveness were considered fundamental (Lin et al. 2006). The idea of a different
as speed  and responsiveness were considered fundamental (Lin et al. 2006). The idea of a different external environment emerged in the change theme, with  words like environment, strategic, and business, also linked to broader words like  management, organizations, and firms. In short, change should be supported by  considering the people involved in the processes. Agility here became the ability to  bring people together to face uncertainty through collaborative relationships (Lin  et al. 2006). Technology was still seen as an enabler of different forms of organiza- tion, not necessarily based on hierarchy (Zammuto et al. 2007). The impact could  even extend beyond customers and teams to stakeholders, meaning everyone must  be ready, and flexibility must be structurally prepared (Olsson 2006). 4.4  2008–2010 Also in this third time frame (Fig.  5), the two central themes are development and  flexibility, still focusing on related topics such as software, process, product, and so  forth. The impact of agile approaches was still in the spotlight, for example, showing  that more direct and continuous customer contact leads to flexible behavior at the  firm level (Combe et al. 2012). In other words, agile approaches imply strategic
S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 flexibility—in terms of resources and coordination—as a critical driver (Yuan  et al. 2010). The IT dimension remained central, with papers that continued to view agility  as a process characteristic associated with specific IT skills (e.g., Tallon 2008).  Researchers continued to study the profound effects of agile approaches from a  process perspective, for example, the impact on various performance measures,  the relationship between product performance and number of customer change  requests (Maruping et al. 2009). Open innovation and agile met, with research- ers showing the value that looking outside of the firm could bring to the process,  helping it to be more agile and thus increasing the innovativeness of the output  (Harryson et al. 2008; Marion and Friar 2012). Fig. 4  Text mining analysis 2005–2007
1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…Other scholars explored the link between process dimensions (efficiency and  effectiveness of the development process) and organizational dimensions, such as  team autonomy (Lee and Xia 2010). In fact, as in the previous cases, a second set of  themes emerged, starting from innovation, and the organizational dimension through  the system theme with concepts such as organizational, organization, or social. At the global level, studies showed that an organizational culture that promotes  flexibility leads to high product innovation performance (Valencia et al. 2010). At  the individual level, leadership studies entered the field, for example, showing the  role of transformational leadership in creating the right climate for change in agile  environments (Sarros et al. 2008). All these approaches require people to embrace  flexibility in order to be ready to adapt to rapidly changing environments while per - forming a wide range of activities and expanding their management skills (Mishra  et al. 2009). In this perspective, teams are also relevant: the role of others is critical because  agile approaches rely heavily on a sharp learning attitude, often facilitated by lateral  relationships (van der Meer-Kooistra and Scapens 2008). Fig. 5  Text mining analysis 2008–2010
S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 4.5  2011–2013 The themes and concepts that emerged in the 3 years from 2011 to 2013 (Fig.  6)  are similar to the previous ones. On the one hand, a part of the concept map  is still focused on development and flexibility and on the application of agile  approaches to the development process to make it more flexible. Agile approaches  were still being studied in terms of the impact of customer involvement, the role  of cross-functional teams and iterative approaches, also in service development  (Zomerdijk and Voss 2011). Many studies dealt with the IT field and software  development, aiming to push the boundaries a little further (Zaitsev et al. 2020).  New elements entered, for example, the possibility to develop in distributed teams  and the need for high alignment within teams (Ramesh et al. 2012). Fig. 6  Text mining analysis 2011–2013
1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…Other studies emphasized the role of people and organizations in this transforma- tion. Indeed, in the IT field, soft dynamics (organizational culture) and the empow - erment of the project team are key success factors (Sheffield and Lemétayer 2013),  in line with the other part of the concept map. For the first time, the organization  topic emerged as a stand-alone theme. In contrast, the management theme started to  focus on cultural dimensions, linking managers, change, and the system themes with  organizations and organizational. Many studies in these years focused on the organ- izational implications of agile approaches. Among others, specific roles emerged,  such as champions and gatekeepers, enhancing the applicability of flexible and agile  approaches to new product development outside the software industry (Kandemir  and Acur 2012). At the same time, the role of organizational change was considered  a prerequisite: strategic flexibility can be enabled by the structural simplification of  the organization (Bock et  al. 2012). Finally, the concept of organizational agility,  market capitalization agility, and operational adjustment agility emerged, mainly  from a process perspective, still very much focused on the IT world (Lu and Rama- murthy 2011). 4.6  2014–2016 The structure of the themes (Fig.  7) from 2014 to 2016 remained fairly stable com- pared to the previous 3 years, but the content of the papers shows a significant shift. Around the development theme, two ad hoc project and process themes emerged.  On the one hand, the previous stream of agile methods in software development  continued, focusing on more complex issues, such as portfolio management (Stettina  and Hörz 2015). New studies highlighted the relevance of agile approaches in tradi- tional industries, for example, testing the impact of agile on project performance in  terms of project efficiency and stakeholder satisfaction,
of agile on project performance in  terms of project efficiency and stakeholder satisfaction, regardless of the application  domain (Serrador and Pinto 2015). On the other hand, a new significant and relevant stream ensued from the words  of Robert Cooper, the creator of the stage-gate model (Cooper 1990). In particu- lar, Cooper questioned the future of stage-gate in his seminal paper that brought  agile principles to the traditional stage-gate process (Cooper 2014). In the following  years, papers emerged that formalized the hybrid stage-gate (i.e., a combination of  the agile principles and the traditional stage-gate approach) (Copper and Sommer  2016a, b), exploring specific applications, such as in the manufacturing field (Cooper  and Sommer 2016a, b; Zhang and Sharifi 2007). Similar studies were developed by  authors focusing on typical innovation projects and highlighting the need to properly  manage the two souls (Conforto and Amaral 2016). The contributions in this area  are not only related to the formalization or quasi-formalization of phases, but also  to the output of the process itself. Counterintuitively, some researchers showed that  radical projects are often the result of more formal ideation methods compared to  incremental ones, where flexibility is higher (Holahan et al. 2014). The second part of the themes centered around flexibility and innovation, again  pushing toward an organizational dimension, enabling innovation at the firm level  and dealing with employees.
S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 The concept of flexibility emerged as an individual characteristic in the con- text of major innovations (Kok and Ligthart 2014). At the same time, many con- cepts referred to the individual or the process level, scaled to the organizational  level. Agility became more about team performance than just a software devel- opment methodology (Conforto et al. 2014, 2016). Ambidexterity scaled at the  organizational level, showing positive effects in terms of strategic flexibility and  new product development perspectives, highlighted the role of dynamic resource  management (Wei et al. 2014). Hybrid approaches also reached the organizational  dimension, referring to a semi-formal organization that combines traditional  Fig. 7  Text mining analysis 2014–2016
1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…structures with informal connections to facilitate flexibility and agile work (Bian- cani et al. 2014). 4.7  2017–2020 In the last 4 years (Fig.  8), the situation evolved, but the duality remained. The lower  part of the figure still shows words related to the development theme, always linked  to the software world and the project dimension. In other words, the original stream  that followed the Agile Manifesto in 2001 continued with studies on the specifics of  agile development projects. For example, new insights emerged about the types of  performance improvements. Considering process performance, several researchers  explored the role of agile principles in making the process more efficient or effective.  Fig. 8  Text mining analysis 2017–2020
S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 For example, in software development, agile practices improved either effectiveness or  efficiency, but not both at the same time (Recker et al. 2017). The emerging stream of the previous 3  years continued with a focus on hybrid  approaches. Cooper (2019) studied the determinants of new product development suc- cess, while Bianchi et al. (2020) explored the combination of agile and stage-gate, high- lighting the advantages and disadvantages of both approaches in the software industry  (Bianchi et al. 2020). At the same time, the full range of words related to the themes of flexibility and  innovation expanded and became more prominent, in combination with many words  related to process and management, recalling the organizational dimension. In these years, agility moved to the strategic level as the ability of a firm to con- tinuously renew itself and maintain flexibility without compromising efficiency (Clauss  et al. 2019), namely anticipating competition to seize emerging opportunities and lever - ing learning processes in continuous innovation (To et al. 2019). When agile reached  the strategic dimension, it meant having the ability to reconfigure the entire business  model (Battistella et al. 2017). The business model perspective was also adopted in the  startup world, with lean approaches strongly related to the agile principles (Ghezzi and  Cavallo 2020). This move toward the organizational dimension, from a project to a strategic ori- entation, also impacted the individual perspective. Agile approaches require people to  embrace specific characteristics that are often compared to an entrepreneurial mindset.  This idea has been reinforced by recent studies that consider flexibility a key character - istic of entrepreneurs (Staniewski and Awruk 2019; Xing et al. 2019), often associated  with a high use of feedback, critical reflection, and goal setting to help people embrace  agile principles while discovering what matters
and goal setting to help people embrace  agile principles while discovering what matters to them (Doeze Jager-van Vliet et al.  2019). The parallelism between the two worlds—the project and the strategic level—was  reinforced by the fact that people working with agile approaches are often held account- able for their decisions, which has a significant impact on the decision-making process  that needs to be influenced by creativity and informal planning (Nemkova 2017). Specific roles usually strengthen these mechanisms between people, for exam- ple, specific coaches (e.g., agile coaches) who increase context sensitivity, support  others, establish simple principles, observe group dynamics, surface conflicts, and  facilitate constructive dialogue (Bäcklander 2019). The same study also highlights  the opportunity for new organizational structures to support these approaches. Finally, individuals working with these approaches require specific skills. Among  others, frame flexibility, defined as the cognitive ability to expand the categorical  boundaries of innovation to understand what resonates within the organization, is  considered a key individual characteristic (Raffaelli et al. 2019). 5  Discussion By systematically reviewing articles related to the evolution of agile approaches,  this study contributes to the innovation management literature As noted, agile  approaches often include two main themes, development and flexibility, which are
1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…at the heart of two broader souls that emerge from the literature: agile-as-a-tool to  change the new product development process, and agile-as-a-culture to embrace  flexibility. We next discuss these two souls based on the literature review and the  theoretical lenses adopted. 5.1  Agile‑as‑a‑tool Agile-as-a-Tool is related to traditional development processes, such as Cooper’s  (1990) stage-gate model, and project management techniques (Turner 2016), which  aim to anticipate as much as possible what might happen during the process in order  to make it efficient and effective. However, the growing importance of uncertainty  in projects has become a relevant issue, as demonstrated by software development  and the resulting digital revolution. Complexity is too high to be fully anticipated,  and flexibility and agility are therefore necessary drivers to cope in such an uncer - tain world (MacCormack et al. 2001; Brand et al. 2021). Given the aforementioned  theoretical contingency and configuration approaches to management, a one-to-one  fit seems to emerge from the findings. In particular, the development perspective (Cooper and Sommer 2016a), with its  ideal type of fit, namely the agile approach, fits a specific context and clearly refers  to a contingency approach (Miles et al. 1978). The reductionist perspective (Meyer  et al. 1993), where the focus of agile is reduced to a mere process, allows one of  the two souls of agile to emerge: agile-as-a-tool. Agile-as-a-tool means that agility  can be implemented in specific processes or to accomplish specific tasks, focusing  the inquiry on specific components of processes (Cooper and Sommer 2016b). This  leads organizations to try to adapt their traditional structure to the new challenges  (e.g., iteration, complexity) that the current world proposes by unidirectionally  rethinking the processes (Hobbs and Petit 2017). Delving into the development dimension
rethinking the processes (Hobbs and Petit 2017). Delving into the development dimension of the chronological evolution of the  agile field, two different waves of research emerged. The first is related to the role  that agile development processes have had in software development. The Agile  Manifesto (Beck et  al. 2001), with a clear focus on improving the development  processes, increased the attention of researchers to the specific value delivered by  different components in a contingency perspective (e.g., Akgün et  al. 2007; Lin  et al. 2006; Tallon 2008; Maruping et al. 2009; Harryson et al. 2008; Marion and  Friar 2012). After years in which scholars focused mainly on the drivers of flexible  and agile approaches to change the development process, this first wave of studies  started to delve into the inner characteristics of agile as a tool to change the innova- tion approaches. Some examples in this direction are Buganza and Verganti (2006),  who suggested taking a lifecycle perspective, or moving outside the software devel- opment industry (e.g., Kandemir and Acur 2012; Meier and Kock 2021), while  questioning the role of individuals within these new processes (e.g., Ramesh et al.  2012; Sheffield and Lemétayer 2013). These are typical elements of a contingency  dimension of analysis, with a focus on contextual factors that aim for reductionist  simplicity, stability, and regulation (Mintzberg 1979).
S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 Later in these years, a second wave of studies emerged related to the development  process based on agile principles. Indeed, the shift from software to new research  areas drew the attention of scholars toward a broader set of areas (Combe et  al.  2012; Battistella et al. 2017; Yuan et al. 2010). This allowed introducing the topic of  hybrid stage-gate methodologies showing that specific agile development processes  require specific components and the formalization and specialization of different  design factors (Cooper 2014; Cooper and Sommer 2016a, b). Challenging his foun- dational work, Cooper (1990) sought to revise the stage-gate model in light of new  market and business needs. Interestingly, he suggested the possibility of merging the traditional development  tool, stage-gate, with the new agile tools. This gave rise to the second wave of the  agile-as-a-tool literature stream, with various papers presenting new processes to  help a wider range of companies benefit from the agile approaches (Cooper 2014;  Cooper and Sommer 2016a, b). As in the case of the first wave, within a few years, researchers began to delve  deeply into these new agile approaches, for example, defining where stage-gate fits  better than agile and how they can be balanced (Bianchi et al. 2020), recognizing  hybrid roles (Ko and Kirsch 2017; Dziallas 2020), and showing hybrid outcomes in  project performance (Kosztyán and Szalkai 2018; Ghezzi and Cavallo 2020). 5.2  Agile‑as‑a‑culture The second theme that emerged from the text mining as a recurrent theme across  all the time frames considered is flexibility (MacCormack et al. 2001). Flexibility  can be accommodated by organizations in different ways, and the theoretical lens  discussed above seems to suggest that this second theme better fits the configuration  perspective (Meyer et al. 1993). Indeed, research on flexibility, by being more holis- tic in its inquiry, based on empirical observation and
on flexibility, by being more holis- tic in its inquiry, based on empirical observation and non-linear in the interactions  between different constructs (Doty et al. 1993), led to the emergence of the second  soul of agile: Agile-as-a-Culture. Agile-as-a-culture represents the complete fulfil- ment of the Agile Manifesto: the organization serves the end goal, putting the results  above any superstructure. This soul is rooted in the modern competitive scenario  where organizational configurations differ to create and have a global impact in a  faster way (Euchner 2017). From this perspective, agile approaches have had a long evolution over the  19 years of research observed in this study. This second set of studies refers to agile  as something much broader than the first set (agile-as-a-tool). The locus where agile  is applied is not a specific process, such as development, but becomes an overall  mindset that extends to all activities and behaviors within the organization. Also in  this second case, we can highlight two main waves over the years: the first is a more  strategic view of agility (e.g., Olsson 2006; Valencia et al. 2010; Bock et al. 2012);  the second a more behavioral view (e.g., Kok and Ligthart 2014; Conforto et  al.  2016; Bäcklander 2019; Mollet and Kaudela-Baum 2022). The former relates to the view of flexibility as an enabler of better strategic man- agement. Thus, agile approaches that aim to manage the direction, the strategic
1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…dimension of the business, mainly take into account an overall structural perspec- tive. This means that contributions thus far mainly focused on the role and govern- ance of external relationships (Lin et  al. 2006; Annosi et  al. 2020), the ability to  continuously change without losing efficiency (Clauss et al. 2019), ad hoc govern- ance frameworks (Sergeeva 2019), and the impact of agile on the whole organiza- tion (Bäcklander 2019). In this stream, many papers suggest how the entire organi- zation should change to embrace a complete shift to agility, moving from virtual  teams (e.g., Powell et al. 2004) to a flat or semi-formal organization (e.g., Zammuto  et al. 2007; Biancani et al. 2014), with one common denominator: agility must be  structural (Olsson 2006). The latter is more attached to the view of individuals in the team playing a dif- ferent role, configuring the overall agile approach as a more holistic way of thinking  for the entire organization (Magistretti et al. 2019; Bäcklander 2019), defining the  concept of organizational agility (Lu and Ramamurthy 2011; Mills et al. 2020). In  this perspective, scholars emphasized the need for the right climate throughout the  organization, facilitated by an ad hoc leadership approach that drives change (Sar - ros et al. 2008). People need to change and adopt agile behaviors to be able to work  in such organizations (Mishra et al. 2009), and develop a critical and a continuous  learning attitude (van der Meer-Kooistra and Scapens 2008; Fecher et al. 2020). Given the holistic view adopted and the complexity of the analysis, the dynamism  of agile-as-a-cultural and the complexity of the phenomenon, this second soul seems  to fit the configuration perspective (Miles et al. 1978). 5.3  An emerging model Our review of the literature presents a dual dichotomy: first, highlighting two con- trasting views of agile approaches that we explore through contingency
first, highlighting two con- trasting views of agile approaches that we explore through contingency and con- figuration theories (Meyer et al. 1993); second, two souls emerge from the studies  considered that seem to perceive agile in two very different ways: agile-as-a-tool and  agile-as-a-culture. At first glance, there appears to be a perfect fit between these two dichotomies  (Fig.  9). In particular, the contingent view of agile seems to be strongly associ- ated with the agile-as-a-tool stream, with a wide range of publications dealing with  structured approaches to making the development process more agile and evolving  coherently with market needs or uncertainty trends. As such, agile becomes a tool  to respond to an external environment that is changing at a rapid pace compared to  the world where the stage-gate model was the dominant design for the development  process. Within these structured processes, the literature defines practices, roles, and  even industries (starting with the IT world) where this type of agility fits better. The second perspective—agile-as-a-culture—seems to embrace a configuration  perspective. This second stream deals with the strategic orientation of firms, aiming  to evolve over time to fit the business context better thanks to the ability to quickly  align and change. This strategic flexibility orientation takes on a human dimen- sion. People need to adopt a mindset that helps them work in such an environment,  regardless of the process. Agility becomes a culture, an attitude that people must
S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 embrace to think, work, and behave in a way that is consistent with constant flexibil- ity that enables the organization to respond to any change. 6  Research agenda and conclusion Our review of how scholars have studied agile approaches over the past years high- lights two perspectives that complement the evidence suggesting that agile can be  read through both contingency and configuration theories. In addition, there is evi- dence of new views showing that the concept of agile has become broader and more  comprehensive over time. On the one hand, there is evidence of a configuration perspective in the agile-as- a-tool literature; on the other hand, there is evidence of a contingency perspective  in the agile-as-a-culture stream. In particular, the second wave of the agile-as-a-tool  literature stream, initiated by Cooper’s (2014) seminal work on hybrid stage-gate,  appears to move away from a contingency view of the process. Agile no longer  seemed to fit all the needs of contingent projects, as it did for software develop- ment (Beck et al. 2001; Dönmez et al. 2016), but became a living process to man- age projects according to their particularities. The level of agility may vary depend- ing on the type of project and the level of uncertainty surrounding it (Cooper 2014,  2016, 2017). Other studies support this view by integrating agile and traditional  approaches (e.g., Bianchi et al. 2020). Therefore, agile approaches are still a tool,  but not in a contingent way. Organizations need to think in an agile way to adapt to  more agile or traditional processes according to specific needs, with people who can  work in any context. The agile-as-a-culture literature stream instead seems to push toward the con- tingency view by identifying specific behaviors that fit agile processes. Examples  are the emergence of specific roles, such as champions and gatekeepers, to bring Agile-as-a-T ool Practice s Processe s Role s Developmen
as champions and gatekeepers, to bring Agile-as-a-T ool Practice s Processe s Role s Developmen tAgile-as-a-Cultu re Behavior s Flexibilit y Organizational Climat e Strategic Orientatio n Contingent Configurationa l Appr oach Fig. 9  Agile-as-a-tool and Agile-as-a-culture
1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…a certain mindset to a contingent project (Kandemir and Acur 2012), or the role of  agile coaches to help people in specific situations (Bäcklander 2019). Early evidence  of organizations implementing a configurational and cultural shift starting from con- tingent changes are emerging (e.g., Magistretti et al. 2019), showing the opportunity  to create ad hoc agile-centers that may help diffuse the culture. Figure  10 presents  an evolution of the original framework that enhances our understanding of agile  studies. This illustrates that agile-as-a-tool and agile-as-a-culture are not confined  to specific corners of the two-by-two matrix, but are evolving and expanding beyond  the dichotomous contingency and configuration perspectives. While predominantly  associated with one view, they are exhibiting a dynamic shift, starting from one cor - ner and progressing to adjacent areas, as indicated by the arrows. 6.1  Agile‑as‑a‑tool: future research adopting a configuration approach The framework suggests there is room to explore agile-as-a-tool in a configuration  perspective. In other words, a holistic approach to better understand how agile pro- cesses can fit into the overall configuration. It may be relevant to examine how the  different components interact in an overarching way that brings together the tools,  processes, and people, moving away from purely the tool view. In particular, at the time, both innovation managers and scholars accepted an  explicit model as the dominant design for project development based Cooper’s  (1990) stage-gate. Evidence from this review suggests that in today’s increasingly  Practice s Processe s Role s DevelopmentBehavior s Flexibilit y Organizational Cl imate Strategic Orientatio nAgile-as-a-Culture Agile-as-a-Tool Contingent Configurationa l Appr oachEmerging Perspectives Evolutions of the Agile  Literature and Future   Research Area sFuture Rese arch Futu re Resear ch
Evolutions of the Agile  Literature and Future   Research Area sFuture Rese arch Futu re Resear ch Fig. 10  An evolving framework for future research
S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 turbulent markets and uncertain development, it may be difficult to see a new refer - ence model emerging. Nevertheless, Cooper (2014, 2016) proposed a more flexible  process that can be adapted to different situations, but this line of research could be  greatly expanded, for example, by asking: How do firms operate knowing that different processes are needed for different  projects? How can the organizational configuration be adapted to accommodate a differ - ent type of development process? How can organizations be prepared to configurationally manage different types  of agility? 6.2  Agile‑as‑a‑culture: future research adopting a contingency approach There is also room to explore a contingency view of the cultural dimension. In  other words, researchers could focus on a more punctual and contingent view of  the behaviors and mindsets of agile approaches. In particular, it may be relevant to  understand how an agile organizational culture can be transformed into specific and  contingent behaviors and roles. Once organizations leverage the configuration per - spective of agile approaches and manage to have the right culture embracing the  agile mindset, can this mindset be operationalized in different contingency dimen- sions? Specifically: How can people rely on the agile mindset to change behaviors to accommodate  a contingency perspective? Which capabilities would help employees embrace an agile culture while being  effective in contingent projects? 6.3  An integrated view of agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: future research  areas Finally, as shown, there is room for further exploration in different directions, taking  a configuration perspective of agile-as-a-tool and a contingency perspective of agile- as-a-culture. However, something more emerged from this review. On one side, two different dichotomies: the tool vs cultural perspective and the  contingent vs configuration perspective. On the other side, several
cultural perspective and the  contingent vs configuration perspective. On the other side, several tensions that cor - respond to the different perspectives. The agile approaches, originally designed to  manage the uncertainty of complex environments, now respond to effectiveness and  efficiency. Studying complex approaches requires focusing on specific dimensions,  hence these dichotomies. However, 20 years of research shows that these dichoto- mies tend to overlap and extend into each other. The next few years of agile research  should take a step back and embrace and explore agile approaches from a balanced  perspective. In particular: How can organizations manage the transition from tradi- tional models to agile approaches? Shifting the unit of analysis, for example, moving from projects or organiza- tion to business units and practices, may help scholars to simultaneously adopt the
1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…contingency and configuration perspectives. Similarly, getting closer to employ - ees—embracing the human perspective that is becoming more prominent in the  innovation field (Bogers et al. 2018)—may help in considering how people work (in  the process dimension) and how they behave (in the cultural dimension). Finally, the framework proposed in Figs.  9 and 10 has some limitations due to  the nature of the review. In particular, our review is limited to agile approaches  in the innovation and management literature. In addition, we only consider agile  approaches that incorporate Cooper’s (2019) view of agile stage-gate and not agile  in general (e.g., agile development, lean manufacturing). 6.4  Conclusions This study explores the agile approaches through a bibliometric systematic literature  review. The contributions and implications of these papers are threefold. First, from an academic perspective, our review provides a systematic and lon- gitudinal view of how scholars have explored agile approaches in terms of con- tingency and configuration theories, highlighting gaps to be explored in future  research. In addition, the analysis of the dataset led to two different perspectives  in the study of agile approaches: agile as a way to improve contingent process per - formance to achieve the output of the development process in a more efficient way,  which we label agile-as-a-tool; and agile as an organizational configuration that goes  beyond the single process or output towards the strategic and direction dimension,  entering all organizational aspects and defining the agile-as-a-culture approach. Our  review shows how these two perspectives of agile approaches considered in the past  have been confined to contingency (the former) and configuration (the latter) theo- ries. The review unveils the temporal evolution of the field, and studies published  over the last decade highlight that the agile-as-a-tool
of the field, and studies published  over the last decade highlight that the agile-as-a-tool and agile-as-a-culture perspec- tives are evolving and emerging as two approaches that can inform practitioners and  scholars on both theories. The review also highlights this initial permeation of the  first perspective (as a tool) with the configuration view in hybrid approaches, and the  second (as a culture) with the contingency view at the individual level. Therefore,  future research could attempt to bridge these gaps. Second, by adopting a longitudinal perspective and mapping the evolution of  research in the agile field, the review enriches our understanding of two relevant  aspects. First, it demonstrates a new way of reviewing the literature by adopting a  temporal perspective to understand how the field has evolved. Second, our study  shows that in the agile field, the contingency perspective as a reductionist mode of  inquiry and the configuration perspective as a holistic mode of inquiry are converg- ing. This could inform scholars that these two theories, similar to the agile-as-a-tool  and agile-as-a-culture concept, are not two sides of the same coin, but a continuum  where more research could enrich our understanding. Third, the review also draws three managerial contributions. First, the article  systematizes two different agile perspectives, agile-as-a-culture and agile-as-a-tool,  showing managers how these two souls are both equally relevant to achieving agility  in an organization. Second, this review sheds light on a complex environment where
S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 multiple approaches that rely on similar antecedents can be introduced with the pur - pose of achieving different goals. By presenting the two souls of agile approaches  and juxtaposing them to contingency and configuration theories respectively, this  study can provide managers and entrepreneurs who want to adopt agile approaches  with a clearer view of what type of agility they need for the challenges ahead. Third,  our review offers a temporal perspective on agile approaches, informing managers  on how agile was perceived in the earlier stages of its development and grew over  time. This way, the review can support managers in finding a stance that resonates  with them and gaining insights on how to introduce agile in their organization. The  review can thereby serve as an informative guide for practitioners, paving the way  for an organization’s evolutionary progression towards agility. Nevertheless, like all systematic literature reviews, our study has some limitations  related to the sampling process and the theories examined. The adoption of a tem- poral evolutionary perspective, although interesting to map a field as vast as agile,  may have hindered the robustness of our findings. In addition, the multi-theoretical  lens adopted, while an interesting way to close the gap between the practitioner and  scholarly interpretation of agile, does not purport to be the only possible interpreta- tion. Therefore, we hope that this will encourage scholars to delve deeper into agile  to discover more connections with management and organization theories. Funding Open access funding provided by Politecnico di Milano within the CRUI-CARE Agreement. Data Availability Statement There is no associated data. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,  which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long  as you give appropriate credit
distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long  as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative  Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this  article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line  to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended  use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permis- sion directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/ licenses/by/4.0/. References Akgün AE, Byrne JC, Lynn GS, Keskin H (2007) New product development in turbulent environ- ments: impact of improvisation and unlearning on new product performance. J Eng Tech Manage  24:203–230 Annosi MC, Martini A, Brunetta F, Marchegiani L (2020) Learning in an agile setting: a multilevel  research study on the evolution of organizational routines. J Bus Res 110:554–566 Atkinson R, Crawford L, Ward S (2006) Fundamental uncertainties in projects and the scope of project  management. Int J Project Manage 24(8):687–698 Bäcklander G (2019) Doing complexity leadership theory: How agile coaches at Spotify practise ena- bling leadership. Creat Innovat Manage 28:42–60 Battistella C, De Toni AF, De Zan G, Pessot E (2017) Cultivating business model agility through focused  capabilities: a multiple case study. J Bus Res 73:65–82 Beck, K, Beedle M, van Bennekum A, Cockburn A, Fowler M, Grenning J, Highsmith J, Hunt A, Jeffries  R, Kern J, Marick B, Martin R, Mellor S, Schwaber K, Sutherland J, Thomas D (2001) Manifesto  for agile software development. Available at: https:// agile manif  esto. org/
1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…Bellis P, Trabucchi D, Buganza T, Verganti R (2022) How do human relationships change in the digital  environment after COVID-19 pandemic? The road towards agility. Eur J Innov Manag 25:821–849 Biancani S, McFarland DA, Dahlander L (2014) The semiformal organization. Organ Sci 25:1306–1324 Bianchi M, Marzi G, Guerini M (2020) Agile, stage-gate and their combination: exploring how they  relate to performance in software development. J Bus Res 110:538–553 Bianchi M, Marzi G, Dabić M (2022) Guest editorial: agile beyond software—in search of flexibility in a  wide range of innovation projects and industries. IEEE Trans Eng Manage 69:3454–3458 Biesenthal C, Wilden R (2014) Multi–level project governance: trends and opportunities. Int J Project  Manage 32:1291–1308 Bock A, Opsahl T, George G, Gann DM (2012) The effects of culture and structure on strategic flexibility  during business model innovation. J Manage Stud 49:279–305 Bogers M, Foss NJ, Lyngsie J (2018) The “human side” of open innovation: the role of employee diver - sity in firm-level openness. Res Policy 47:218–231 Brand M, Tiberius V, Bican PM, Brem A (2021) Agility as an innovation driver: towards an agile front  end of innovation framework. RMS 15:157–187 Buganza T, Verganti R (2006) Life-cycle flexibility: how to measure and improve the innovative capabil- ity in turbulent environments. J Prod Innov Manag 23:393–407 Buhalis D, O’Connor P (2005) Information communication technology revolutionizing tourism. Tour  Recreat Res 30:7–16 Calabrò A, Vecchiarini M, Gast J, Campopiano G, De Massis A, Kraus S (2019) Innovation in family  firms: a systematic literature review and guidance for future research. Int J Manag Rev 21:317–355 Calantone R, Garcia R, Dröge C (2003) The effects of environmental turbulence on new product develop- ment strategy planning. J Prod Innov Manag 20:90–103 Campbell C, Pitt LF, Parent M, Berthon PR (2011) Understanding consumer
Prod Innov Manag 20:90–103 Campbell C, Pitt LF, Parent M, Berthon PR (2011) Understanding consumer conversations around ads in  a Web 2.0 world. J Advert 40:87–102 Chirumalla K (2021) Building digitally-enabled process innovation in the process industries: a dynamic  capabilities approach. Technovation, 102256. Clauss T, Abebe M, Tangpong C, Hock M (2019) Strategic agility, business model innovation, and firm  performance: an empirical investigation. IEEE Trans Eng Manage 68:767–784 Combe IA, Rudd JM, Leeflang PSH, Greenley GE (2012) Antecedents to strategic flexibility: manage- ment cognition, firm resources and strategic options. Eur J Mark 46:1320–1339 Conforto EC, Amaral DC (2016) Agile project management and stage-gate model—a hybrid framework  for technology-based companies. J Eng Tech Manage 40:1–14 Conforto EC, Salum F, Amaral DC, da Silva SL, De Almeida LFM (2014) Can agile project management  be adopted by industries other than software development. Proj Manag J 45:21–34 Conforto EC, Amaral DC, da Silva SL, Di Felippo A, Kamikawachi DSL (2016) The agility construct on  project management theory. Int J Project Manage 34:660–674 Conz E, Lamb PW, De Massis A (2020) Practicing resilience in family firms: an investigation through  phenomenography. J Fam Bus Strat 11:100355 Cooper RG (1990) Stage–gate systems: a new tool for managing new products. Bus Horiz 33:44–54 Cooper RG (2014) What’s next? After stage-gate. Res Technol Manage 57:20–31 Cooper RG (2016) Agile-stage-gate hybrids. Res Technol Manag 59:21–29 Cooper RG (2017) Idea-to-launch gating systems: better, faster, and more agile. Res Technol Manage  60:48–52 Cooper RG (2019) The drivers of success in new product development. Ind Mark Manage 76:36–47 Cooper RG, Sommer AF (2016a) Agile-stage-gate: new idea-to-launch method for manufactured new  products is faster, more responsive. Ind Mark Manage 59:167–180 Cooper RG, Sommer AF (2016b) The agile-stage-gate hybrid model: a promising new approach and a  new
Cooper RG, Sommer AF (2016b) The agile-stage-gate hybrid model: a promising new approach and a  new research opportunity. J Prod Innov Manage 33:513–526 Cooper RG, Sommer AF (2018) Agile-stage-gate for manufacturers. Res Technol Manage 61:17–26 Delery JE, Doty DH (1996) Modes of theorizing in strategic human resource management: tests of uni- versalistic, contingency, and configurational performance predictions. Acad Manag J 39:802–835 Doeze Jager-van Vliet SB, Born MP, van der Molen HT (2019) Using a portfolio-based process to  develop agility among employees. Hum Resour Dev Q 30:39–60 Dönmez D, Grote G, Brusoni S (2016) Routine interdependencies as a source of stability and flexibility.  A study of agile software development teams. Inf Organ 26:63–83 Doty DH, Glick WH, Huber GP (1993) Fit, equifinality, and organizational effectiveness: a test of two  configurational theories. Acad Manage J 36:1196–1250
S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 Drazin R, Van de Ven AH (1985) Alternative forms of fit in contingency theory. Adm Sci Q 30:514–539 Dziallas M (2020) How to evaluate innovative ideas and concepts at the front-end? A front-end perspec- tive of the automotive innovation process. J Bus Res 110:502–518 Euchner J (2017) Transformation for growth at GE: an interview with Viv Goldstein. Res Technol Man- age 60:14–19 Fecher F, Winding J, Hutter K, Füller J (2020) Innovation labs from a participants’ perspective. J Bus Res  110:567–576 Galbraith JR (2002) Organizing to deliver solutions. Organ Dyn 31:194–213 Gama F, Magistretti S (2023) Artificial intelligence in innovation management: a review of innovation  capabilities and a taxonomy of AI applications. J Prod Innov Manage. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ jpim.  12698 Gama F, Sjödin D, Parida V, Frishammar J, Wincent J (2021) Exploratory and exploitative capability  paths for innovation: a contingency framework for harnessing fuzziness in the front end. Technova- tion 113:102416 Ghezzi A (2019) Digital startups and the adoption and implementation of lean startup approaches: effec- tuation, bricolage and opportunity creation in practice. Technol Forecast Soc Chang 146:945–960 Ghezzi A, Cavallo A (2020) Agile business model innovation in digital entrepreneurship: lean startup  approaches. J Bus Res 110:519–537 Ghezzi A, Gabelloni D, Martini A, Natalicchio A (2018) Crowdsourcing: a review and suggestions for  future research. Int J Manage Rev 20:343–363 Ghosh S, Hughes M, Hodgkinson I, Hughes P (2021) Digital transformation of industrial businesses: a  dynamic capability approach. Technovation 113:102414 Grass A, Backmann J, Hoegl M (2020) From empowerment dynamics to team adaptability: exploring and  conceptualizing the continuous agile team innovation process. J Prod Innov Manage 37:324–351 Guinan PJ, Parise S, Langowitz N (2019) Creating an innovative digital project team: levers to enable  digital transformation. Bus
N (2019) Creating an innovative digital project team: levers to enable  digital transformation. Bus Horiz 62:717–727 Harryson S, Kliknaite S, Dudkowski R (2008) Flexibility in innovation through external learning: explor - ing two models for enhanced industry-university collaboration. Int J Technol Manage 41:109–137 Hobbs B, Petit Y (2017) Agile methods on large projects in large organizations. Proj Manage J 48:3–19 Holahan PJ, Sullivan ZZ, Markham SK (2014) Product development as core competence: how formal  product development practices differ for radical, more innovative, and incremental product innova- tions. J Prod Innov Manage 31:329–345 Hoonsopon D, Puriwat W (2019) Organizational agility: key to the success of new product development.  IEEE Trans Eng Manage 68:1722–1733 Huikkola T, Kohtamäki M, Rabetino R, Makkonen H, Holtkamp P (2021) Overcoming the challenges of  smart solution development: co-alignment of processes, routines, and practices to manage product,  service, and software integration. Technovation 118:102382 Joshi AW, Sharma S (2004) Customer knowledge development: antecedents and impact on new product  performance. J Mark 68:47–59 Jovanovic M, Sjödin D, Parida V (2021) Co-evolution of platform architecture, platform services, and  platform governance: expanding the platform value of industrial digital platforms. Technovation  118:102218 Kandemir D, Acur N (2012) Examining proactive strategic decision-making flexibility in new product  development. J Prod Innov Manage 29:608–622 Keupp MM, Palmié M, Gassmann O (2012) The strategic management of innovation: a systematic review  and paths for future research. Int J Manage Rev 14:367–390 Ko D, Kirsch LJ (2017) The hybrid IT project manager: one foot each in the IT and business domains. Int  J Project Manage 35:307–319 Kok RAW, Ligthart PEM (2014) Differentiating major and incremental new product development: the  effects of functional and numerical workforce flexibility. J Prod Innov Manage 31:30–42
the  effects of functional and numerical workforce flexibility. J Prod Innov Manage 31:30–42 Korotka M, Bos-Nehles AC (2016) “Best” HRM-performance configurations? A critical review and  research agenda. Acad Manage Proc 1:10530 Kosztyán ZT, Szalkai I (2018) Hybrid time-quality-cost trade-off problems. Oper Res Perspect 5:306–318 Kraus S, Breier M, Dasí-Rodríguez S (2020) The art of crafting a systematic literature review in entrepre- neurship research. Int Entrepreneurship Manage J 16:1023–1042 Kraus S, Breier M, Lim WM, Dabić M, Kumar S, Kanbach D, Mukherjee D, Corvello V, Piñeiro-Chousa  J, Liguori E, Palacios-Marqués D (2022) Literature reviews as independent studies: guidelines for  academic practice. RMS 16:2577–2595
1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…Kraus S, Bouncken RB, Yela Aránega A (2024) The burgeoning role of literature review articles in man- agement research: an introduction and outlook. RMS. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11846- 024- 00729-1 Lee G, Xia W (2010) Toward agile: an integrated analysis of quantitative and qualitative field data on  software development agility. MIS Q 34:87–114 Lim WM, Kumar S, Ali F (2022) Advancing knowledge through literature reviews: ‘what’, ‘why’, and  ‘how to contribute.’ Serv Ind J 42:481–513 Lin CT, Chiu H, Tseng YH (2006) Agility evaluation using fuzzy logic. Int J Prod Econ 101:353–368 Lu Y, Ramamurthy K (2011) Understanding the link between information technology capability and  organizational agility: an empirical examination. MIS Q 35:931–954 MacCormack A, Verganti R, Iansiti M (2001) Developing products on “Internet time”: the anatomy of a  flexible development process. Manage Sci 47:133–150 Magistretti S, Trabucchi D, Dell’Era C, Buganza T (2019) A new path toward a hybrid model: insights  from PWC’s Italian experience centre. Res Technol Manage 62:30–37 Magistretti S, Ardito L, Messeni Petruzzelli A (2021) Framing the microfoundations of design think - ing as a dynamic capability for innovation: reconciling theory and practice. J Prod Innov Manage  38:645–667 Magistretti S, Sanasi S, Dell’Era C, Ghezzi A (2023) Entrepreneurship as design: a design process for the  emergence and development of entrepreneurial opportunities. Creat Innovat Manage 32:5–21 Mansoori Y, Karlsson T, Lundqvist M (2019) The influence of the lean startup methodology on entrepre- neur-coach relationships in the context of a startup accelerator. Technovation 84:37–47 Marion TJ, Friar JH (2012) Managing global outsourcing to enhance lean innovation. Res Technol Man- age 55:44–50 Maruping LM, Venkatesh V, Agarwal R (2009) A control theory perspective on agile methodology use  and changing user requirements. Inf Syst Res 20:377–399
perspective on agile methodology use  and changing user requirements. Inf Syst Res 20:377–399 Mathies C, Burford M (2011) Customer service understanding: gender differences of frontline employ - ees. Manag Serv Qual Int J 21:636–648 Meier A, Kock A (2021) Agile R&D units’ organization beyond software—developing and validating a  multidimensional scale in an engineering context. IEEE Trans Eng Manage 69:3476–3488 Meyer AD, Tsui AS, Hinings CR (1993) Configurational approaches to organizational analysis. Acad  Manag J 36:1175–1195 Micheli P, Wilner SJ, Bhatti SH, Mura M, Beverland MB (2019) Doing design thinking: conceptual  review, synthesis, and research agenda. J Prod Innov Manag 36:124–148 Miles RE, Snow CC, Meyer AD, Coleman HJ Jr (1978) Organizational strategy, structure, and process.  Acad Manag Rev 3:546–562 Miller D (1981) Toward a new contingency approach: the search for organizational gestalts. J Manage  Stud 18:1–26 Miller D (2018) Challenging trends in configuration research: where are the configurations? Strateg  Organ 16:453–469 Mills AJ, Berthon PR, Pitt C (2020) Agile authorship: evolving models of innovation for information– intensive offerings. J Bus Res 110:577–583 Mintzberg H (1979) An emerging strategy of “direct” research. Adm Sci Q 24:582–589 Mintzberg H (1983) The case for corporate social responsibility. J Bus Strategy 4:3–15 Mishra AK, Mishera KE, Spreitzer GM (2009) Downsizing the company without downsizing morale.  MIT Sloan Manag Rev 50:39–44 Mollet LS, Kaudela-Baum S (2022) Critical HR capabilities in agile organisations: a cross-case analysis  in Swiss SMEs. RMS 17:2055–2075 Myers CG (2018) Coactive vicarious learning: toward a relational theory of vicarious learning in organi- zations. Acad Manag Rev 43:610–634 Nemkova E (2017) The impact of agility on the market performance of born-global firms: an exploratory  study of the ‘tech city’ innovation cluster. J Bus Res 80:257–265 Olsson NO (2006) Management of flexibility in projects.
innovation cluster. J Bus Res 80:257–265 Olsson NO (2006) Management of flexibility in projects. Int J Project Manage 24:66–74 Ordanini A, Rubera G, DeFillippi R (2008) The many moods of inter-organizational imitation: a critical  review. Int J Manag Rev 10:375–398 Paluch S, Antons D, Brettel M, Hopp C, Salge T, Piller F, Wentzel D (2020) Stage-gate and agile devel- opment in the digital age: promises, perils, and boundary conditions. J Bus Res 110:495–501 Pangarso A, Sisilia K, Setyorini R, Peranginangin Y, Awirya AA (2022) The long path to achieving green  economy performance for micro small medium enterprise. J Innovat Entrepreneurship 11:1–19
S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 Pellizzoni E, Trabucchi D, Buganza T (2019) When agility meets open innovation: two approaches to  manage inbound projects. Creat Innovat Manage 28:464–476 Pisano GP (2015) You need an innovation strategy. Harv Bus Rev 93:44–54 Podsakoff PM, MacKenzie SB, Bachrach DG, Podsakoff NP (2005) The influence of management jour - nals in the 1980s and 1990s. Strateg Manag J 26:473–488 Powell A, Piccoli G, Ives B (2004) Virtual teams: a review of current literature and directions for future  research. ACM SIGMIS Database 35:6–36 Pullen AJ, de Weerd-Nederhof PC, Groen AJ, Fisscher OA (2012) Open innovation in practice: goal  complementarity and closed NPD networks to explain differences in innovation performance for  SMEs in the medical devices sector. J Prod Innov Manag 29:917–934 Raffaelli R, Glynn MA, Tushman M (2019) Frame flexibility: the role of cognitive and emotional framing  in innovation adoption by incumbent firms. Strateg Manag J 40:1013–1039 Ramesh B, Mohan K, Cao L (2012) Ambidexterity in agile distributed development: an empirical investi- gation. Inf Syst Res 23:323–339 Randhawa K, Wilden R, Hohberger J (2016) A bibliometric review of open innovation: setting a research  agenda. J Prod Innov Manag 33:750–772 Recker J, Holten R, Hummel M, Rosenkranz C (2017) How agile practices impact customer responsive- ness and development success: a field study. Proj Manag J 48:99–121 Rigby DK, Sutherland J, Cappelli P, Simon P (2020) Agile: tools for preparing your team for the future.  HBR Insights Series. Rooney D (2005) Knowledge, economy, technology and society: the politics of discourse. Telematics  Inform 22:405–422 Sanasi S, Manotti J, Ghezzi A (2022) Achieving agility in high-reputation firms: agile experimentation  revisited. IEEE Trans Eng Manage 69:3529–3545 Sarros JC, Cooper BK, Santora JC (2008) Building a climate for innovation through transformational  leadership and organizational culture. J Leadership Organ Stud
innovation through transformational  leadership and organizational culture. J Leadership Organ Stud 15:145–158 Sauer PC, Seuring S (2023) How to conduct systematic literature reviews in management research: a  guide in 6 steps and 14 decisions. RMS 17:1899–1933 Savino T, Messeni Petruzzelli A, Albino V (2017) Search and recombination process to innovate: a  review of the empirical evidence and a research agenda. Int J Manag Rev 19:54–75 Sawhney M, Verona G, Prandelli E (2005) Collaborating to create: the internet as a platform for customer  engagement in product innovation. J Interact Mark 19:4–17 Schoemaker M (2003) Identity in flexible organizations: experiences in Dutch organizations. Creat Inno- vat Manage 12:191–201 Sergeeva N (2019) Towards more flexible approach to governance to allow innovation: the case of UK  infrastructure. Int J Manag Proj Bus 13:1–19 Serrador P, Pinto JK (2015) Does agile work? A quantitative analysis of agile project success. Int J Pro- ject Manag 33:1040–1051 Sharma S, Singh G, Jones P, Kraus S, Dwivedi YK (2022) Understanding agile innovation management  adoption for SMEs. IEEE Trans Eng Manage 69:3546–3557 Sheffield J, Lemétayer J (2013) Factors associated with the software development agility of successful  projects. Int J Project Manage 31:459–472 Snyder H (2019) Literature review as a research methodology: an overview and guidelines. J Bus Res  104:333–339 Sommer SC, Loch CH (2004) Selectionism and learning in projects with complexity and unforeseeable  uncertainty. Manage Sci 50:1334–1347 Spagnoletti P, Kazemargi N, Prencipe A (2021) Agile practices and organizational agility in software  ecosystems. IEEE Trans Eng Manage 69:3604–3617 Staniewski MW, Awruk K (2019) Entrepreneurial success and achievement motivation—a preliminary  report on a validation study of the questionnaire of entrepreneurial success. J Bus Res 101:433–440 Stettina CJ, Hörz J (2015) Agile portfolio management: an empirical perspective on the practice in
Stettina CJ, Hörz J (2015) Agile portfolio management: an empirical perspective on the practice in use.  Int J Project Manage 33:140–152 Suddaby R (2010) Challenges for institutional theory. J Manag Inq 19:14–20 Tallon PP (2008) Inside the adaptive enterprise: an information technology capabilities perspective on  business process agility. Inf Technol Manage 9:21–36 Teece D, Peteraf M, Leih S (2016) Dynamic capabilities and organizational agility: risk, uncertainty, and  strategy in the innovation economy. Calif Manage Rev 58:13–35
1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…Thornton SC, Henneberg SC, Leischnig A, Naudé P (2019) It’s in the mix: how firms configure resource  mobilization for new product success. J Prod Innov Manag 3:513–531 To CKM, Au JSC, Kan CW (2019) Uncovering business model innovation contexts: a comparative analy - sis by fsQCA methods. J Bus Res 101:783–796 Trabucchi D, Talenti L, Buganza T (2019) How do big bang disruptors look like? A business model per - spective. Technol Forecast Soc Chang 141:330–340 Tranfield D, Denyer D, Smart P (2003) Towards a methodology for developing evidence-informed man- agement knowledge by means of systematic review. Br J Manag 14:207–222 Tuomi I (2012) Foresight in an unpredictable world. Technol Anal Strat Manage 24:735–751 Turner R (2016) Gower handbook of project management. Routledge Valencia JCN, Valle RS, Jiménez DJ (2010) Organizational culture as determinant of product innovation.  Eur J Innov Manag 13:466–480 van der Meer-Kooistra J, Scapens RW (2008) The governance of lateral relations between and within  organisations. Manag Account Res 19:365–384 Verganti R (1999) Planned flexibility: linking anticipation and reaction in product development projects. J  Prod Innov Manag 16:363–376 Vrontis D, Belas J, Thrassou A, Santoro G, Christofi M (2023) Strategic agility, openness and perfor - mance: a mixed method comparative analysis of firms operating in developed and emerging mar - kets. RMS 17:1365–1398 Wei Z, Yi Y, Guo H (2014) Organizational learning ambidexterity, strategic flexibility, and new product  development. J Prod Innov Manag 31:832–847 Worren N, Moore K, Cardona P (2002) Modularity, strategic flexibility, and firm performance: a study of  the home appliance industry. Strateg Manag J 23:1123–1140 Xing Y, Liu Y, Boojihawon DK, Tarba S (2019) Entrepreneurial team and strategic agility: a conceptual  framework and research agenda. Hum Resour Manag Rev 30:100696 Yan K, Cheng TE, Li G, Wei Z (2019) Overcoming
and research agenda. Hum Resour Manag Rev 30:100696 Yan K, Cheng TE, Li G, Wei Z (2019) Overcoming the service paradox by leveraging organizational  design and cultural factors: a combined configuration and contingency approach. IEEE Trans Eng  Manage 68:498–512 Yuan L, Zhongfeng S, Yi L (2010) Can strategic flexibility help firms profit from product innovation?  Technovation 30:300–309 Zaitsev A, Gal U, Tan B (2020) Coordination artifacts in agile software development. Inf Organ  30:100288 Zammuto RF, Griffith TL, Majchrzak A, Dougherty DJ, Faraj S (2007) Information technology and the  changing fabric of organization. Organ Sci 18:749–762 Zhang Z, Sharifi H (2007) Towards theory building in agile manufacturing strategy—a taxonomical  approach. IEEE Trans Eng Manage 54:351–370 Zhang F, Wang Y, Li D, Cui V (2017) Configurations of innovations across domains: an organizational  ambidexterity view. J Prod Innov Manag 34:821–841 Zomerdijk LG, Voss CA (2011) NSD processes and practices in experiential services. J Prod Innov  Manag 28:63–80 Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps  and institutional affiliations.
Vol.:(0123456789)Review of Managerial Science https://doi.org/10.1007/s11846-024-00745-1 1 3 ORIGINAL PAPER Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive  review of agile approaches adopting contingency  and configuration theories Stefano Magistretti1  · Daniel Trabucchi1  Received: 19 May 2023 / Accepted: 14 February 2024  © The Author(s) 2024 Abstract Today’s world requires new approaches to innovation that leverage continuous test- ing and pivoting. Speed and the ability to respond to exogenous shocks are becoming  increasingly important in both theory and practice. Following the introduction of the  Agile Manifesto in 2001, a wide range of industries have adopted agile approaches,  which differ from other ways of managing innovation projects by promoting flex- ibility and the rapid development of new solutions. Despite the proliferation of agile  approaches across industries, the literature lacks a systematic understanding of their  underlying elements. Therefore, we conduct a systematic literature review using a  text mining technique to longitudinally explore the evolutionary dynamics of the  field. Analyzing the results through the dichotomous lens of contingency and con- figuration theories, we show that the agile literature can be systematized into two  perspectives: agile-as-a-tool in the contingency perspective, and agile-as-a-culture  in the configuration perspective. Our review reveals underexplored intersections in  the field of innovation and provides interesting insights into these two perspectives.  We also propose a research agenda to shed light on these emerging perspectives in  the agile innovation and management literature. Keywords Agile · Agile approaches · Configuration · Contingency · Innovation ·  Flexibility JEL Classification M10 · O30 · O31  * Stefano Magistretti   stefano.magistretti@polimi.it  Daniel Trabucchi   daniel.trabucchi@polimi.it 1 School of Management, Politecnico di Milano, Via Lambruschini, 4B 20156 Milano, Italy --- S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 1 Introduction The term agile is not only a buzzword in many academic fields (Grass et al. 2020)  but is also considered a relevant approach for managing innovation (Cooper and  Sommer 2016a, 2018; Sharma et al. 2022). Indeed, in a world where competition is  increasing (Micheli et al. 2019; Trabucchi et al. 2019; Bellis et al. 2022) and man- aging uncertainty is crucial (MacCormack et al. 2001; Conforto et al. 2014, 2016;  Conz et al. 2020), approaches based on the ability of firms to implement dynamism  (Teece et al. 2016; Ghosh et al. 2021) and agility (Bianchi et al. 2022) are needed.  Therefore, it is important for both practitioners and scholars to better understand  what agile means and how it can be used to drive innovation, digital transformation,  and management activities in general. Several approaches and methods that leverage agility have emerged in the practi- tioner world in recent years. These agile approaches emphasize the role of iteration  and learning mechanisms to cope with the complexity of a world that cannot be eas- ily predicted (Tuomi 2012; Magistretti et al. 2023). For example, General Electric  proposed the FastWorks framework as an agile approach (Euchner 2017), Amazon  introduced the press release method to develop innovations with customers, adopt- ing iteration and agility as the fuel of innovation (Pisano 2015), and Spotify showed  that agility is not just a process, but also relevant at the level of the firm’s culture  (Bäcklander 2019). These are just a few examples of the proliferation of agile  approaches and principles in organizations. Indeed, the Harvard Business Review  database shows the relevance of agile approaches in the practitioner domain with  over 1.500 articles, books, and case studies on how agile is permeating the business  and management world. In addition, Harvard Business Review published a book in  2020 that distills the insights from this plethora of publications to give --- published a book in  2020 that distills the insights from this plethora of publications to give managers  some guidance on how to embrace agile (Rigby et al. 2020). Therefore, the interest  in this topic is undeniable and evident in both the practitioner and academic worlds. The first seminal work was the Agile Manifesto by Beck et al. published in 2001,  which summarized the agile approach in 12 principles and is considered a milestone  (Paluch et al. 2020). Among others, it emphasizes the role of people over processes,  work over documentation, collaboration over contracts, and flexibility over planning  (Cooper and Sommer 2016a, b). Over the years, other paradigms based on similar  principles have emerged in different domains, such as design (Mansoori et al. 2019),  business model innovation (Ghezzi 2019; Jovanovic et al. 2021; Sanasi et al. 2022),  and digital transformation (Guinan et al. 2019; Chirumalla 2021; Ghosh et al. 2021). As the literature is vast and scattered, a comprehensive review would allow  understanding the fundamental elements of agile approaches and highlight the  under-researched areas. However, to the best of our knowledge, no systematic lit- erature review covers the agile field from a temporal and evolutionary perspec- tive, bridging the gap between an interpretation of the approach in practice and  innovation management theories. This is important because such a review could  inform practitioners about the evolution of the approach and help them to better  exploit the potential of the agile approach. For researchers, it can highlight what  we know and do not know about agile approaches and help expand the field with --- 1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…future research. Hence, we aim to answer the following research question: What  are the different interpretations and the underlying dimensions of agile over time? To this end, we conduct a review of the agile literature over time. For the defi- nition of agile approaches, we follow Beck et al. (2001), later discussed in Paluch  et al. (2020), based on: (i) iteration, (ii) high unpredictability, (iii) time-box con- straints, and (iv) continuous interaction with customers. To analyse the agile lit- erature, we employ a text mining technique for systematic literature reviews fol- lowing Biesenthal and Wilden (2014) and Randhawa et al. (2016). In line with  the research guidelines for setting inclusion and exclusion criteria (Tranfield et al.  2003; Sauer and Seuring 2023), we collected a database of articles related to the  agile field. To delve deeper into the database and discuss the findings, we con- sider contingency and configuration theories (Doty et al. 1993; Delery and Doty  1996). In particular, these organizational theories help us discuss and understand  the underlying components and elements of the agile literature. In addition, these  theories show that different multidimensional constellations of conceptually  distinct factors can give rise to different frameworks (Meyer et al. 1993). First,  researchers who view agile approaches from a contingency perspective (Miller  1981; Calantone et al. 2003; Gama et al. 2021) emphasize the generalizability of  the approaches and their prominence in academic communities. Second, a more  holistic mode of inquiry has naturally exposed the configurational dimension of  agile adoption (Miles et al. 1978; Pullen et al. 2012). In reviewing the articles, agile-as-a-culture emerged as a perspective influ- enced by organizational dimensions and a configurational lens (Miles et al. 1978;  Pullen et  al. 2012; Bäcklander 2019; Hoonsopon and Puriwat 2019; Huikkola --- (Miles et al. 1978;  Pullen et  al. 2012; Bäcklander 2019; Hoonsopon and Puriwat 2019; Huikkola  et al. 2021; Vrontis et al. 2023). Instead, agile-as-a-tool synthesizes the literature  on processes and activities to implement agility in innovation through the lens  of contingency theory (Miller 1981; Calantone et al. 2003; Cooper and Sommer  2016a, b; Pellizzoni et al. 2019; Gama et al. 2021). Moreover, this theoretical lens  has helped to unveil understudied areas. For example, our literature review shows  that articles dealing with agile-as-a-culture take a holistic view of the organiza- tional dimensions of agility, but what happens to the components of agile-as-a- culture in a reductionist perspective remains under-researched. In particular,  reductionism is a research approach that tends to look at the individual dimen- sions and constituents of an organization (Meyer et al. 1993). Similarly, the review shows that it is unclear what type of configuration might  be generated when agile is viewed in a configuration perspective and part of the  agile-as-a-tool cluster. Thus, our review benefits practitioners and scholars by  showing that agile is not only a tool to support innovation under uncertainty or  changing the organizational culture, but also in in-between situations. This tool- culture dichotomy appears to be a common way of recognizing different perspec- tives in the agile literature, which may influence the adoption of the agile innova- tion principles. As other scholars report, diverse and sometimes conflicting views  are common in academic research (Suddaby 2010; Micheli et  al. 2019; Magis- tretti et al. 2021). Nevertheless, different definitions of the same construct may  hinder the understanding and adoption of the agile methodology itself. Therefore, --- S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 a clear definition resulting from the systematization of the literature can mitigate  this issue and promote the growth of knowledge (Kraus et al. 2022). 2  Theoretical lenses to study agile approaches Innovation approaches are characterized by different combinations of design and  contextual factors that influence the way the approach is configured in the organi- zation (Mintzberg 1979, 1983). Indeed, it is crucial for the efficiency of processes  and approaches that different configurations support equifinality (Doty et al. 1993).  Equifinality is the theoretical assumption that different forms can be equally effec- tive (Drazin and Van de Ven 1985). The debate about different types of configura- tions has grown over the years, and the role of configuration theory in management  is beyond doubt (Korotka and Bos-Nehles 2016; Zhang et  al. 2017; Myers 2018;  Thornton et  al. 2019). Nevertheless, configuration theory is always compared to  contingency theory. Indeed, the former is concerned with a more holistic under - standing of a phenomenon, the latter with a more reductionist analysis (Meyer et al.  1993). This aspect, together with the fact that another underlying assumption is that  contingency theory looks for aggregations of components (Meyer et  al. 1993), is  interesting as a theoretical lens for the investigation of agile where this dichotomy  has been noted but not discussed in depth. In contrast, configuration theory looks at the strong cohesion of the construct,  showing how this theoretical lens can support delving into the agile literature (Miller  2018; Yan et al. 2019). Finally, the debate around the two theories also shows that  contingency looks for effectiveness determined by the situational context, while con- figuration theory aims to achieve equifinality regardless of the types of configuration  highlighted by the research (Doty et al. 1993). Thus, we aim to better understand the  agile approaches by --- by the research (Doty et al. 1993). Thus, we aim to better understand the  agile approaches by searching within the academic debate for constructs that share  the tendency of agile to be considered more effective as a contingency or configura- tion approach. From examining existing knowledge about agile and linking it to contingency and  configuration theories, some preliminary insights emerge. First, the Agile Manifesto  (Beck et al. 2001) clarifies that people involved in agile projects have more account- ability, which is determined by the situational context in which they are immersed.  This is evident when considering the accountability that a developer has in the defi- nition-of-done in a scrum project (Spagnoletti et al. 2021). Second, agile approaches  show that flexibility can increase innovation and help to better respond to changes  in a specific context (MacCormack et al. 2001). Flexibility is intended as an organi- zation’s ability to adapt to the environment and change the design of the solution  according to evolving information (Verganti 1999). These first two examples show a  typical contingency perspective characterized by reductionism, contextual influence,  and quasi-stationary equilibrium (i.e., the tendency to study phenomena as if in equi- librium or moving towards it). On the other hand, what has emerged from the agile  literature is that to embrace agile principles, organizations should work holistically  at the firm level rather than at the process level. Indeed, if flexibility is not a feature  at the organizational level, its benefits and impact are lower (Buganza and Verganti --- 1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…2006). As such, when culture is examined, a configuration approach to agile seems  to emerge. This dyadic view of agile also seems to be supported in a recent special  issue of the Journal of Business Research, where the guest editors emphasized this  view of agile as a contingency or holistic (configuration) perspective. The editorial  by Paluch et al. (2020) shows that the first three articles focused on contingent inves- tigations of agile (Dziallas 2020; Ghezzi and Cavallo 2020; Bianchi et  al. 2020),  while the remaining three took a more holistic and thus a configuration perspective  (Annosi et al. 2020; Fecher et al. 2020; Mills et al. 2020). The need to better understand the interrelationships between these two perspec- tives led us to delve deeper into the literature. As the initial findings show that the  agile approaches can be read according to contingency and configuration theories  (Miles et al. 1978), this review aims to enrich our knowledge of the agile approaches  in the literature using these theories in a longitudinal perspective to unveil the  essence of the agile approaches and inform future research. 3  Methodology 3.1  Review criteria In this section, we describe the approach used to review the agile literature. To con- duct the review, we adopted and adapted the systematic review principles of the  identification phase proposed by Tranfield et  al. (2003) and subsequently imple- mented by different scholars (e.g., Savino et al. 2017; Ghezzi et al. 2018; Calabrò  et al. 2019; Lim et al. 2022). Our data collection process is based on the assumption  that there are predefined stages to follow to collect and cluster different scientific  contributions (Kraus et al. 2020). This structured approach ensures transparency and replicability (Snyder 2019;  Kraus et al. 2024), and informs future researchers in the field of agile approaches.  The process consists of five steps and is reported --- researchers in the field of agile approaches.  The process consists of five steps and is reported next. First, we delved into the agile literature to find the boundaries of the research  scope. This first divergent moment was crucial to understand the overarching area  in which the systematic literature review should be positioned. Given the goal of  disentangling a broad topic, we chose the Scopus database because it allowed us to  include more articles and be less stringent in the initial search (Keupp et al. 2012;  Pangarso et al. 2022; Gama and Magistretti 2023). Second, we identified a set of more than ten keywords that we could potentially use  to search the repository and to find interesting contributions. These keywords were  refined in iterative cycles among the authors to agree on the framing of the search.  We used the final set of keywords (Table  1) to search within Scopus. In particular, the  keywords belonging to category A are central to the field of agile approaches, while  category B helps to better describe the field. As mentioned, the field is strongly char - acterized by agility, flexibility, and lean approaches, but the individual words may be  misleading due to their general meaning. Thus, we searched within categories A and B  with an OR relationship between the constructs, while to better define the limits of the  search, we compiled the two categories with an AND logic (e.g., agile innovation/lean --- S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 development). The decision to limit the two categories to a small, albeit fairly broad, set  of keywords was related to the objective of this literature review. A more focused set of  keywords would have limited the collected articles to a smaller area, thus excluding the  diversity of agile approaches from the analysis. Third, we restricted the search to articles written in English and downloadable in  full-text, excluding working papers, editorials, research notes and commentaries, inter - views, dissertation abstracts, books, book chapters, and conference proceedings (Keupp  et al. 2012). There is consensus among scholars that these types of articles have higher  value than those in non-academic peer-reviewed journals (Ordanini et al. 2008; Podsa- koff et al. 2005). Moreover, given the focus on contingency and configuration theories  as defined in the business literature, we limited the subject area to business, manage- ment, and accounting. Fourth, given that the agile approach is a growing stream and its boom is associated  with the introduction of the agile principles in the Agile Manifesto in 2001, we decided  to systematically review the literature starting from 2002 when the business, manage- ment, and accounting literature began to look at it to understand how these principles  might be associated with other innovation approaches. The literature shows the increase  in agile approaches to manage innovation in a more agile, flexible, and lean way, where  the goal is to execute solutions quickly to increase learning and accept failure. Because  these principles were adopted by only a few organizations before 2001, reviewing  these articles would have led to misleading conclusions. We conducted our search up  to July 2020, namely 20 years of research published after the introduction of the Agile  Manifesto. Fifth, considering that the two categories and the start of the search in 2002 did not  limit the area of investigation --- the two categories and the start of the search in 2002 did not  limit the area of investigation in terms of the management field, we also introduced a  set of keywords adopting an AND NOT logic. This is because we realized that although  category B focuses on the innovation and new product/service development perspec- tives, the search added many articles from other management areas not relevant for our  review. Therefore, we excluded articles that dealt with the environment, operations,  production, sustainability, electricity, energy, urban, and supply chains. This five-step process is the formal procedure that brought the initial dataset of  153,118 articles to 3527, as shown in Table 2 . 3.2  Data analysis We first analyzed these 3,527 articles using text mining. This technique can pro- vide conceptual insights through an unstructured ontological discovery based on  words for an unbiased and content-driven review of the literature (e.g., Biesenthal Table 1  Keywords used to  perform the searchCategory A Category B Agil* Innovation Flex* Development Lean Project Management --- S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 and Wilden 2014; Randhawa et al. 2016). We used the textual data mining software  Leximancer 4.0, in line with studies in the field of product and innovation manage- ment (e.g., Randhawa et al. 2016). Leximancer uses a Bayesian learning algorithm that performs a bootstrap analy - sis, considering an extended list of related terms that signify a concept from the  text data. This type of analysis has been shown to be consistent with expert judg- ment (Campbell et al. 2011; Rooney 2005). The algorithm highlights the most fre- quent concepts and defines their relationships. It starts with the identification of seed  words (through the thematic analysis of documents), which are then linked by co- occurrence and frequency in their context based on semantic analysis (Mathies and  Burford 2011). Previous systematic literature reviews have used text mining analysis to reveal  differences between different subsamples of the overall dataset. For example, Rand- hawa et al. (2016) use multiple time frames to show the evolution of the field. In our  case, the text mining analysis supports the longitudinal study of research developed  from 2002 to 2020. Figures  3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 show the results of this analysis,  where dots represent concepts (collections of words with related meanings) and cir - cles represent themes, which are aggregations of related concepts. The brightness of  the circle indicates the importance of the themes, while the distance between con- cepts indicates how related they are. We use these analyses to untangle the vast body  of knowledge that has been developed over the years. 4  Results This section presents the first descriptive analysis of the dataset, followed by  detailed views of the elements that emerged from the text mining over the time hori- zon considered. 4.1  Descriptive analysis Before presenting the detailed results of the systematic literature review, we provide  some descriptive information about the --- results of the systematic literature review, we provide  some descriptive information about the dataset. Figure  1 shows the most represented  journals (more than 20 articles in the sample) and the two main strands: innova- tion and project management. Indeed, project management journals (e.g., Interna- tional Journal of Project Management or International Journal of Managing Projects  in Business) and innovation journals (e.g., Technological Forecasting and Social  Change and Journal of Product Innovation Management) have the highest number of  papers in the dataset. The contributions are well distributed over time (Fig.  2), with three local peaks:  2008, 2014, and 2019 (to date). This suggests that agile approaches were a hot topic  at the beginning of the century (mainly referring to flexibility), and that these topics  have received even more attention from scholars in recent years. --- 1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…at the heart of two broader souls that emerge from the literature: agile-as-a-tool to  change the new product development process, and agile-as-a-culture to embrace  flexibility. We next discuss these two souls based on the literature review and the  theoretical lenses adopted. 5.1  Agile‑as‑a‑tool Agile-as-a-Tool is related to traditional development processes, such as Cooper’s  (1990) stage-gate model, and project management techniques (Turner 2016), which  aim to anticipate as much as possible what might happen during the process in order  to make it efficient and effective. However, the growing importance of uncertainty  in projects has become a relevant issue, as demonstrated by software development  and the resulting digital revolution. Complexity is too high to be fully anticipated,  and flexibility and agility are therefore necessary drivers to cope in such an uncer - tain world (MacCormack et al. 2001; Brand et al. 2021). Given the aforementioned  theoretical contingency and configuration approaches to management, a one-to-one  fit seems to emerge from the findings. In particular, the development perspective (Cooper and Sommer 2016a), with its  ideal type of fit, namely the agile approach, fits a specific context and clearly refers  to a contingency approach (Miles et al. 1978). The reductionist perspective (Meyer  et al. 1993), where the focus of agile is reduced to a mere process, allows one of  the two souls of agile to emerge: agile-as-a-tool. Agile-as-a-tool means that agility  can be implemented in specific processes or to accomplish specific tasks, focusing  the inquiry on specific components of processes (Cooper and Sommer 2016b). This  leads organizations to try to adapt their traditional structure to the new challenges  (e.g., iteration, complexity) that the current world proposes by unidirectionally  rethinking the processes (Hobbs and Petit 2017). Delving into the development dimension --- on flexibility, by being more holis- tic in its inquiry, based on empirical observation and non-linear in the interactions  between different constructs (Doty et al. 1993), led to the emergence of the second  soul of agile: Agile-as-a-Culture. Agile-as-a-culture represents the complete fulfil- ment of the Agile Manifesto: the organization serves the end goal, putting the results  above any superstructure. This soul is rooted in the modern competitive scenario  where organizational configurations differ to create and have a global impact in a  faster way (Euchner 2017). From this perspective, agile approaches have had a long evolution over the  19 years of research observed in this study. This second set of studies refers to agile  as something much broader than the first set (agile-as-a-tool). The locus where agile  is applied is not a specific process, such as development, but becomes an overall  mindset that extends to all activities and behaviors within the organization. Also in  this second case, we can highlight two main waves over the years: the first is a more  strategic view of agility (e.g., Olsson 2006; Valencia et al. 2010; Bock et al. 2012);  the second a more behavioral view (e.g., Kok and Ligthart 2014; Conforto et  al.  2016; Bäcklander 2019; Mollet and Kaudela-Baum 2022). The former relates to the view of flexibility as an enabler of better strategic man- agement. Thus, agile approaches that aim to manage the direction, the strategic --- 1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…dimension of the business, mainly take into account an overall structural perspec- tive. This means that contributions thus far mainly focused on the role and govern- ance of external relationships (Lin et  al. 2006; Annosi et  al. 2020), the ability to  continuously change without losing efficiency (Clauss et al. 2019), ad hoc govern- ance frameworks (Sergeeva 2019), and the impact of agile on the whole organiza- tion (Bäcklander 2019). In this stream, many papers suggest how the entire organi- zation should change to embrace a complete shift to agility, moving from virtual  teams (e.g., Powell et al. 2004) to a flat or semi-formal organization (e.g., Zammuto  et al. 2007; Biancani et al. 2014), with one common denominator: agility must be  structural (Olsson 2006). The latter is more attached to the view of individuals in the team playing a dif- ferent role, configuring the overall agile approach as a more holistic way of thinking  for the entire organization (Magistretti et al. 2019; Bäcklander 2019), defining the  concept of organizational agility (Lu and Ramamurthy 2011; Mills et al. 2020). In  this perspective, scholars emphasized the need for the right climate throughout the  organization, facilitated by an ad hoc leadership approach that drives change (Sar - ros et al. 2008). People need to change and adopt agile behaviors to be able to work  in such organizations (Mishra et al. 2009), and develop a critical and a continuous  learning attitude (van der Meer-Kooistra and Scapens 2008; Fecher et al. 2020). Given the holistic view adopted and the complexity of the analysis, the dynamism  of agile-as-a-cultural and the complexity of the phenomenon, this second soul seems  to fit the configuration perspective (Miles et al. 1978). 5.3  An emerging model Our review of the literature presents a dual dichotomy: first, highlighting two con- trasting views of agile approaches that we explore through contingency --- first, highlighting two con- trasting views of agile approaches that we explore through contingency and con- figuration theories (Meyer et al. 1993); second, two souls emerge from the studies  considered that seem to perceive agile in two very different ways: agile-as-a-tool and  agile-as-a-culture. At first glance, there appears to be a perfect fit between these two dichotomies  (Fig.  9). In particular, the contingent view of agile seems to be strongly associ- ated with the agile-as-a-tool stream, with a wide range of publications dealing with  structured approaches to making the development process more agile and evolving  coherently with market needs or uncertainty trends. As such, agile becomes a tool  to respond to an external environment that is changing at a rapid pace compared to  the world where the stage-gate model was the dominant design for the development  process. Within these structured processes, the literature defines practices, roles, and  even industries (starting with the IT world) where this type of agility fits better. The second perspective—agile-as-a-culture—seems to embrace a configuration  perspective. This second stream deals with the strategic orientation of firms, aiming  to evolve over time to fit the business context better thanks to the ability to quickly  align and change. This strategic flexibility orientation takes on a human dimen- sion. People need to adopt a mindset that helps them work in such an environment,  regardless of the process. Agility becomes a culture, an attitude that people must --- S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 embrace to think, work, and behave in a way that is consistent with constant flexibil- ity that enables the organization to respond to any change. 6  Research agenda and conclusion Our review of how scholars have studied agile approaches over the past years high- lights two perspectives that complement the evidence suggesting that agile can be  read through both contingency and configuration theories. In addition, there is evi- dence of new views showing that the concept of agile has become broader and more  comprehensive over time. On the one hand, there is evidence of a configuration perspective in the agile-as- a-tool literature; on the other hand, there is evidence of a contingency perspective  in the agile-as-a-culture stream. In particular, the second wave of the agile-as-a-tool  literature stream, initiated by Cooper’s (2014) seminal work on hybrid stage-gate,  appears to move away from a contingency view of the process. Agile no longer  seemed to fit all the needs of contingent projects, as it did for software develop- ment (Beck et al. 2001; Dönmez et al. 2016), but became a living process to man- age projects according to their particularities. The level of agility may vary depend- ing on the type of project and the level of uncertainty surrounding it (Cooper 2014,  2016, 2017). Other studies support this view by integrating agile and traditional  approaches (e.g., Bianchi et al. 2020). Therefore, agile approaches are still a tool,  but not in a contingent way. Organizations need to think in an agile way to adapt to  more agile or traditional processes according to specific needs, with people who can  work in any context. The agile-as-a-culture literature stream instead seems to push toward the con- tingency view by identifying specific behaviors that fit agile processes. Examples  are the emergence of specific roles, such as champions and gatekeepers, to bring Agile-as-a-T ool Practice s Processe s Role s Developmen --- as champions and gatekeepers, to bring Agile-as-a-T ool Practice s Processe s Role s Developmen tAgile-as-a-Cultu re Behavior s Flexibilit y Organizational Climat e Strategic Orientatio n Contingent Configurationa l Appr oach Fig. 9  Agile-as-a-tool and Agile-as-a-culture --- 1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…a certain mindset to a contingent project (Kandemir and Acur 2012), or the role of  agile coaches to help people in specific situations (Bäcklander 2019). Early evidence  of organizations implementing a configurational and cultural shift starting from con- tingent changes are emerging (e.g., Magistretti et al. 2019), showing the opportunity  to create ad hoc agile-centers that may help diffuse the culture. Figure  10 presents  an evolution of the original framework that enhances our understanding of agile  studies. This illustrates that agile-as-a-tool and agile-as-a-culture are not confined  to specific corners of the two-by-two matrix, but are evolving and expanding beyond  the dichotomous contingency and configuration perspectives. While predominantly  associated with one view, they are exhibiting a dynamic shift, starting from one cor - ner and progressing to adjacent areas, as indicated by the arrows. 6.1  Agile‑as‑a‑tool: future research adopting a configuration approach The framework suggests there is room to explore agile-as-a-tool in a configuration  perspective. In other words, a holistic approach to better understand how agile pro- cesses can fit into the overall configuration. It may be relevant to examine how the  different components interact in an overarching way that brings together the tools,  processes, and people, moving away from purely the tool view. In particular, at the time, both innovation managers and scholars accepted an  explicit model as the dominant design for project development based Cooper’s  (1990) stage-gate. Evidence from this review suggests that in today’s increasingly  Practice s Processe s Role s DevelopmentBehavior s Flexibilit y Organizational Cl imate Strategic Orientatio nAgile-as-a-Culture Agile-as-a-Tool Contingent Configurationa l Appr oachEmerging Perspectives Evolutions of the Agile  Literature and Future   Research Area sFuture Rese arch Futu re Resear ch --- Evolutions of the Agile  Literature and Future   Research Area sFuture Rese arch Futu re Resear ch Fig. 10  An evolving framework for future research --- S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 turbulent markets and uncertain development, it may be difficult to see a new refer - ence model emerging. Nevertheless, Cooper (2014, 2016) proposed a more flexible  process that can be adapted to different situations, but this line of research could be  greatly expanded, for example, by asking: How do firms operate knowing that different processes are needed for different  projects? How can the organizational configuration be adapted to accommodate a differ - ent type of development process? How can organizations be prepared to configurationally manage different types  of agility? 6.2  Agile‑as‑a‑culture: future research adopting a contingency approach There is also room to explore a contingency view of the cultural dimension. In  other words, researchers could focus on a more punctual and contingent view of  the behaviors and mindsets of agile approaches. In particular, it may be relevant to  understand how an agile organizational culture can be transformed into specific and  contingent behaviors and roles. Once organizations leverage the configuration per - spective of agile approaches and manage to have the right culture embracing the  agile mindset, can this mindset be operationalized in different contingency dimen- sions? Specifically: How can people rely on the agile mindset to change behaviors to accommodate  a contingency perspective? Which capabilities would help employees embrace an agile culture while being  effective in contingent projects? 6.3  An integrated view of agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: future research  areas Finally, as shown, there is room for further exploration in different directions, taking  a configuration perspective of agile-as-a-tool and a contingency perspective of agile- as-a-culture. However, something more emerged from this review. On one side, two different dichotomies: the tool vs cultural perspective and the  contingent vs configuration perspective. On the other side, several --- cultural perspective and the  contingent vs configuration perspective. On the other side, several tensions that cor - respond to the different perspectives. The agile approaches, originally designed to  manage the uncertainty of complex environments, now respond to effectiveness and  efficiency. Studying complex approaches requires focusing on specific dimensions,  hence these dichotomies. However, 20 years of research shows that these dichoto- mies tend to overlap and extend into each other. The next few years of agile research  should take a step back and embrace and explore agile approaches from a balanced  perspective. In particular: How can organizations manage the transition from tradi- tional models to agile approaches? Shifting the unit of analysis, for example, moving from projects or organiza- tion to business units and practices, may help scholars to simultaneously adopt the --- 1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…contingency and configuration perspectives. Similarly, getting closer to employ - ees—embracing the human perspective that is becoming more prominent in the  innovation field (Bogers et al. 2018)—may help in considering how people work (in  the process dimension) and how they behave (in the cultural dimension). Finally, the framework proposed in Figs.  9 and 10 has some limitations due to  the nature of the review. In particular, our review is limited to agile approaches  in the innovation and management literature. In addition, we only consider agile  approaches that incorporate Cooper’s (2019) view of agile stage-gate and not agile  in general (e.g., agile development, lean manufacturing). 6.4  Conclusions This study explores the agile approaches through a bibliometric systematic literature  review. The contributions and implications of these papers are threefold. First, from an academic perspective, our review provides a systematic and lon- gitudinal view of how scholars have explored agile approaches in terms of con- tingency and configuration theories, highlighting gaps to be explored in future  research. In addition, the analysis of the dataset led to two different perspectives  in the study of agile approaches: agile as a way to improve contingent process per - formance to achieve the output of the development process in a more efficient way,  which we label agile-as-a-tool; and agile as an organizational configuration that goes  beyond the single process or output towards the strategic and direction dimension,  entering all organizational aspects and defining the agile-as-a-culture approach. Our  review shows how these two perspectives of agile approaches considered in the past  have been confined to contingency (the former) and configuration (the latter) theo- ries. The review unveils the temporal evolution of the field, and studies published  over the last decade highlight that the agile-as-a-tool --- of the field, and studies published  over the last decade highlight that the agile-as-a-tool and agile-as-a-culture perspec- tives are evolving and emerging as two approaches that can inform practitioners and  scholars on both theories. The review also highlights this initial permeation of the  first perspective (as a tool) with the configuration view in hybrid approaches, and the  second (as a culture) with the contingency view at the individual level. Therefore,  future research could attempt to bridge these gaps. Second, by adopting a longitudinal perspective and mapping the evolution of  research in the agile field, the review enriches our understanding of two relevant  aspects. First, it demonstrates a new way of reviewing the literature by adopting a  temporal perspective to understand how the field has evolved. Second, our study  shows that in the agile field, the contingency perspective as a reductionist mode of  inquiry and the configuration perspective as a holistic mode of inquiry are converg- ing. This could inform scholars that these two theories, similar to the agile-as-a-tool  and agile-as-a-culture concept, are not two sides of the same coin, but a continuum  where more research could enrich our understanding. Third, the review also draws three managerial contributions. First, the article  systematizes two different agile perspectives, agile-as-a-culture and agile-as-a-tool,  showing managers how these two souls are both equally relevant to achieving agility  in an organization. Second, this review sheds light on a complex environment where --- S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 multiple approaches that rely on similar antecedents can be introduced with the pur - pose of achieving different goals. By presenting the two souls of agile approaches  and juxtaposing them to contingency and configuration theories respectively, this  study can provide managers and entrepreneurs who want to adopt agile approaches  with a clearer view of what type of agility they need for the challenges ahead. Third,  our review offers a temporal perspective on agile approaches, informing managers  on how agile was perceived in the earlier stages of its development and grew over  time. This way, the review can support managers in finding a stance that resonates  with them and gaining insights on how to introduce agile in their organization. The  review can thereby serve as an informative guide for practitioners, paving the way  for an organization’s evolutionary progression towards agility. Nevertheless, like all systematic literature reviews, our study has some limitations  related to the sampling process and the theories examined. The adoption of a tem- poral evolutionary perspective, although interesting to map a field as vast as agile,  may have hindered the robustness of our findings. In addition, the multi-theoretical  lens adopted, while an interesting way to close the gap between the practitioner and  scholarly interpretation of agile, does not purport to be the only possible interpreta- tion. Therefore, we hope that this will encourage scholars to delve deeper into agile  to discover more connections with management and organization theories. Funding Open access funding provided by Politecnico di Milano within the CRUI-CARE Agreement. Data Availability Statement There is no associated data. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,  which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long  as you give appropriate credit --- 1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…Kraus S, Bouncken RB, Yela Aránega A (2024) The burgeoning role of literature review articles in man- agement research: an introduction and outlook. RMS. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11846- 024- 00729-1 Lee G, Xia W (2010) Toward agile: an integrated analysis of quantitative and qualitative field data on  software development agility. MIS Q 34:87–114 Lim WM, Kumar S, Ali F (2022) Advancing knowledge through literature reviews: ‘what’, ‘why’, and  ‘how to contribute.’ Serv Ind J 42:481–513 Lin CT, Chiu H, Tseng YH (2006) Agility evaluation using fuzzy logic. Int J Prod Econ 101:353–368 Lu Y, Ramamurthy K (2011) Understanding the link between information technology capability and  organizational agility: an empirical examination. MIS Q 35:931–954 MacCormack A, Verganti R, Iansiti M (2001) Developing products on “Internet time”: the anatomy of a  flexible development process. Manage Sci 47:133–150 Magistretti S, Trabucchi D, Dell’Era C, Buganza T (2019) A new path toward a hybrid model: insights  from PWC’s Italian experience centre. Res Technol Manage 62:30–37 Magistretti S, Ardito L, Messeni Petruzzelli A (2021) Framing the microfoundations of design think - ing as a dynamic capability for innovation: reconciling theory and practice. J Prod Innov Manage  38:645–667 Magistretti S, Sanasi S, Dell’Era C, Ghezzi A (2023) Entrepreneurship as design: a design process for the  emergence and development of entrepreneurial opportunities. Creat Innovat Manage 32:5–21 Mansoori Y, Karlsson T, Lundqvist M (2019) The influence of the lean startup methodology on entrepre- neur-coach relationships in the context of a startup accelerator. Technovation 84:37–47 Marion TJ, Friar JH (2012) Managing global outsourcing to enhance lean innovation. Res Technol Man- age 55:44–50 Maruping LM, Venkatesh V, Agarwal R (2009) A control theory perspective on agile methodology use  and changing user requirements. Inf Syst Res 20:377–399
1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive… Table 2  Steps followed to reach the final article dataset Initial article dataset Language Document type Subject area Years Perspective Screening with the Keywords  defined in Table 1Limited to English Limited to Articles (Published  and in Press)Limited to Business Management  and AccountingStarting from 2002 Exclusion: Environment Operations Production Supply Chain 156.765 156.500 79.095 8.310 6.642 3.527 --- 1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…Since the numbers are high throughout the period, we provide a detailed analysis  in 3-year windows (2002–2004, 2005–2007, 2008–2010, 2011–2013, 2014–2016,  and 2017–2020) to highlight the trends and shifts over time. 4.2  2002–2004 At the beginning of the century, research in the field of agile approaches was mainly  driven by two themes: development and flexibility (Fig.  3). Development includes as  concepts and keywords models, R&D, process, and product, which strongly recall 01020304050607080Most frequent journals in the sample Fig. 1  Most frequent journals in the sample 050100150200250300350400 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020Papers published over time Fig. 2  Papers published over time --- S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 the traditional elements of the new product development process. The emergence of  development as a concept with a strong focus on processes, interactions, and models  reinforces the traditional view of agile as a process-oriented approach. At the time of the Agile Manifesto (Beck et al. 2001), a novel paradigm in new  product development was emerging that challenged stage-gate as the dominant  design (Cooper 1990). This led to the second concept in the literature, flexibility.  Flexibility includes words such as knowledge and innovation as precursors to these  models. Technology seems to act as the primary enabler of such changes, along with  a strategic market need (within the firm concept). Most cited papers in these years  refer to market needs that push towards modular products and processes to increase  the fit between new product development and customer demands (Worren et  al.  2002). Overall, customers and market dynamics are seen as more uncertain, hence  the growing need for methods and practices to deal with them (Sommer and Loch  2004). These needs seem to be supported by digital technologies, which at the time  appeared to hold great promise for creating new organizational forms, for exam- ple, enabling virtual teams, and changing development processes (Powell et  al.  2004). However, the rapid response demanded by the market also posed significant  Fig. 3  Text mining analysis 2002–2004 --- 1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…challenges to the way people worked and behaved in organizations (Joshi and  Sharma 2004; Galbraith 2002). On the one hand, the development process is a cen- tral theme, and on the other hand, researchers point out that agile approaches tend to  emphasize the critical role of relationships between individuals and creating dense  networks that embed a strong sense of belonging (Schoemaker 2003), namely the  human side of agile. 4.3  2005–2007 The central theme in this period (Fig.  4) remains development, with ancillary themes  such as flexibility, product, and models echoing the previous years. Researchers continued the discussion that started between 2002 and 2004 by con- sidering technology as a key factor in driving and enabling the creation of a new  development process. Uncertainty around innovation projects continued to increase  and new project management approaches were required (Atkinson et al. 2006). From  a process perspective, the dimensions of improvisation (simultaneous planning and  executing) and unlearning (changing routines) to face newly emerging needs that  could not be met with what was previously learned (Akgün et al. 2007) began to  gain importance. In addition, the role of customers and their greater involvement in  development started to emerge (Sawhney et al. 2005). Scholars began paying atten- tion to flexibility in a broader perspective. First, the concept of flexibility started to  be highly considered even outside of software development (Buganza and Verganti  2006), mainly due to the growing importance of customer-centricity and the intro- duction of topics such personalization (Buhalis and O’Connor 2005). New evidence  suggested that flexibility needed to move from the front end to the entire lifecycle  (Buganza and Verganti 2006). In this scenario, specific capabilities such as speed  and responsiveness were considered fundamental (Lin et al. 2006). The idea of a different --- as speed  and responsiveness were considered fundamental (Lin et al. 2006). The idea of a different external environment emerged in the change theme, with  words like environment, strategic, and business, also linked to broader words like  management, organizations, and firms. In short, change should be supported by  considering the people involved in the processes. Agility here became the ability to  bring people together to face uncertainty through collaborative relationships (Lin  et al. 2006). Technology was still seen as an enabler of different forms of organiza- tion, not necessarily based on hierarchy (Zammuto et al. 2007). The impact could  even extend beyond customers and teams to stakeholders, meaning everyone must  be ready, and flexibility must be structurally prepared (Olsson 2006). 4.4  2008–2010 Also in this third time frame (Fig.  5), the two central themes are development and  flexibility, still focusing on related topics such as software, process, product, and so  forth. The impact of agile approaches was still in the spotlight, for example, showing  that more direct and continuous customer contact leads to flexible behavior at the  firm level (Combe et al. 2012). In other words, agile approaches imply strategic --- S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 flexibility—in terms of resources and coordination—as a critical driver (Yuan  et al. 2010). The IT dimension remained central, with papers that continued to view agility  as a process characteristic associated with specific IT skills (e.g., Tallon 2008).  Researchers continued to study the profound effects of agile approaches from a  process perspective, for example, the impact on various performance measures,  the relationship between product performance and number of customer change  requests (Maruping et al. 2009). Open innovation and agile met, with research- ers showing the value that looking outside of the firm could bring to the process,  helping it to be more agile and thus increasing the innovativeness of the output  (Harryson et al. 2008; Marion and Friar 2012). Fig. 4  Text mining analysis 2005–2007 --- 1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…Other scholars explored the link between process dimensions (efficiency and  effectiveness of the development process) and organizational dimensions, such as  team autonomy (Lee and Xia 2010). In fact, as in the previous cases, a second set of  themes emerged, starting from innovation, and the organizational dimension through  the system theme with concepts such as organizational, organization, or social. At the global level, studies showed that an organizational culture that promotes  flexibility leads to high product innovation performance (Valencia et al. 2010). At  the individual level, leadership studies entered the field, for example, showing the  role of transformational leadership in creating the right climate for change in agile  environments (Sarros et al. 2008). All these approaches require people to embrace  flexibility in order to be ready to adapt to rapidly changing environments while per - forming a wide range of activities and expanding their management skills (Mishra  et al. 2009). In this perspective, teams are also relevant: the role of others is critical because  agile approaches rely heavily on a sharp learning attitude, often facilitated by lateral  relationships (van der Meer-Kooistra and Scapens 2008). Fig. 5  Text mining analysis 2008–2010 --- S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 4.5  2011–2013 The themes and concepts that emerged in the 3 years from 2011 to 2013 (Fig.  6)  are similar to the previous ones. On the one hand, a part of the concept map  is still focused on development and flexibility and on the application of agile  approaches to the development process to make it more flexible. Agile approaches  were still being studied in terms of the impact of customer involvement, the role  of cross-functional teams and iterative approaches, also in service development  (Zomerdijk and Voss 2011). Many studies dealt with the IT field and software  development, aiming to push the boundaries a little further (Zaitsev et al. 2020).  New elements entered, for example, the possibility to develop in distributed teams  and the need for high alignment within teams (Ramesh et al. 2012). Fig. 6  Text mining analysis 2011–2013 --- 1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…Other studies emphasized the role of people and organizations in this transforma- tion. Indeed, in the IT field, soft dynamics (organizational culture) and the empow - erment of the project team are key success factors (Sheffield and Lemétayer 2013),  in line with the other part of the concept map. For the first time, the organization  topic emerged as a stand-alone theme. In contrast, the management theme started to  focus on cultural dimensions, linking managers, change, and the system themes with  organizations and organizational. Many studies in these years focused on the organ- izational implications of agile approaches. Among others, specific roles emerged,  such as champions and gatekeepers, enhancing the applicability of flexible and agile  approaches to new product development outside the software industry (Kandemir  and Acur 2012). At the same time, the role of organizational change was considered  a prerequisite: strategic flexibility can be enabled by the structural simplification of  the organization (Bock et  al. 2012). Finally, the concept of organizational agility,  market capitalization agility, and operational adjustment agility emerged, mainly  from a process perspective, still very much focused on the IT world (Lu and Rama- murthy 2011). 4.6  2014–2016 The structure of the themes (Fig.  7) from 2014 to 2016 remained fairly stable com- pared to the previous 3 years, but the content of the papers shows a significant shift. Around the development theme, two ad hoc project and process themes emerged.  On the one hand, the previous stream of agile methods in software development  continued, focusing on more complex issues, such as portfolio management (Stettina  and Hörz 2015). New studies highlighted the relevance of agile approaches in tradi- tional industries, for example, testing the impact of agile on project performance in  terms of project efficiency and stakeholder satisfaction, --- of agile on project performance in  terms of project efficiency and stakeholder satisfaction, regardless of the application  domain (Serrador and Pinto 2015). On the other hand, a new significant and relevant stream ensued from the words  of Robert Cooper, the creator of the stage-gate model (Cooper 1990). In particu- lar, Cooper questioned the future of stage-gate in his seminal paper that brought  agile principles to the traditional stage-gate process (Cooper 2014). In the following  years, papers emerged that formalized the hybrid stage-gate (i.e., a combination of  the agile principles and the traditional stage-gate approach) (Copper and Sommer  2016a, b), exploring specific applications, such as in the manufacturing field (Cooper  and Sommer 2016a, b; Zhang and Sharifi 2007). Similar studies were developed by  authors focusing on typical innovation projects and highlighting the need to properly  manage the two souls (Conforto and Amaral 2016). The contributions in this area  are not only related to the formalization or quasi-formalization of phases, but also  to the output of the process itself. Counterintuitively, some researchers showed that  radical projects are often the result of more formal ideation methods compared to  incremental ones, where flexibility is higher (Holahan et al. 2014). The second part of the themes centered around flexibility and innovation, again  pushing toward an organizational dimension, enabling innovation at the firm level  and dealing with employees. --- S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 The concept of flexibility emerged as an individual characteristic in the con- text of major innovations (Kok and Ligthart 2014). At the same time, many con- cepts referred to the individual or the process level, scaled to the organizational  level. Agility became more about team performance than just a software devel- opment methodology (Conforto et al. 2014, 2016). Ambidexterity scaled at the  organizational level, showing positive effects in terms of strategic flexibility and  new product development perspectives, highlighted the role of dynamic resource  management (Wei et al. 2014). Hybrid approaches also reached the organizational  dimension, referring to a semi-formal organization that combines traditional  Fig. 7  Text mining analysis 2014–2016 --- 1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…structures with informal connections to facilitate flexibility and agile work (Bian- cani et al. 2014). 4.7  2017–2020 In the last 4 years (Fig.  8), the situation evolved, but the duality remained. The lower  part of the figure still shows words related to the development theme, always linked  to the software world and the project dimension. In other words, the original stream  that followed the Agile Manifesto in 2001 continued with studies on the specifics of  agile development projects. For example, new insights emerged about the types of  performance improvements. Considering process performance, several researchers  explored the role of agile principles in making the process more efficient or effective.  Fig. 8  Text mining analysis 2017–2020 --- S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 For example, in software development, agile practices improved either effectiveness or  efficiency, but not both at the same time (Recker et al. 2017). The emerging stream of the previous 3  years continued with a focus on hybrid  approaches. Cooper (2019) studied the determinants of new product development suc- cess, while Bianchi et al. (2020) explored the combination of agile and stage-gate, high- lighting the advantages and disadvantages of both approaches in the software industry  (Bianchi et al. 2020). At the same time, the full range of words related to the themes of flexibility and  innovation expanded and became more prominent, in combination with many words  related to process and management, recalling the organizational dimension. In these years, agility moved to the strategic level as the ability of a firm to con- tinuously renew itself and maintain flexibility without compromising efficiency (Clauss  et al. 2019), namely anticipating competition to seize emerging opportunities and lever - ing learning processes in continuous innovation (To et al. 2019). When agile reached  the strategic dimension, it meant having the ability to reconfigure the entire business  model (Battistella et al. 2017). The business model perspective was also adopted in the  startup world, with lean approaches strongly related to the agile principles (Ghezzi and  Cavallo 2020). This move toward the organizational dimension, from a project to a strategic ori- entation, also impacted the individual perspective. Agile approaches require people to  embrace specific characteristics that are often compared to an entrepreneurial mindset.  This idea has been reinforced by recent studies that consider flexibility a key character - istic of entrepreneurs (Staniewski and Awruk 2019; Xing et al. 2019), often associated  with a high use of feedback, critical reflection, and goal setting to help people embrace  agile principles while discovering what matters --- and goal setting to help people embrace  agile principles while discovering what matters to them (Doeze Jager-van Vliet et al.  2019). The parallelism between the two worlds—the project and the strategic level—was  reinforced by the fact that people working with agile approaches are often held account- able for their decisions, which has a significant impact on the decision-making process  that needs to be influenced by creativity and informal planning (Nemkova 2017). Specific roles usually strengthen these mechanisms between people, for exam- ple, specific coaches (e.g., agile coaches) who increase context sensitivity, support  others, establish simple principles, observe group dynamics, surface conflicts, and  facilitate constructive dialogue (Bäcklander 2019). The same study also highlights  the opportunity for new organizational structures to support these approaches. Finally, individuals working with these approaches require specific skills. Among  others, frame flexibility, defined as the cognitive ability to expand the categorical  boundaries of innovation to understand what resonates within the organization, is  considered a key individual characteristic (Raffaelli et al. 2019). 5  Discussion By systematically reviewing articles related to the evolution of agile approaches,  this study contributes to the innovation management literature As noted, agile  approaches often include two main themes, development and flexibility, which are --- rethinking the processes (Hobbs and Petit 2017). Delving into the development dimension of the chronological evolution of the  agile field, two different waves of research emerged. The first is related to the role  that agile development processes have had in software development. The Agile  Manifesto (Beck et  al. 2001), with a clear focus on improving the development  processes, increased the attention of researchers to the specific value delivered by  different components in a contingency perspective (e.g., Akgün et  al. 2007; Lin  et al. 2006; Tallon 2008; Maruping et al. 2009; Harryson et al. 2008; Marion and  Friar 2012). After years in which scholars focused mainly on the drivers of flexible  and agile approaches to change the development process, this first wave of studies  started to delve into the inner characteristics of agile as a tool to change the innova- tion approaches. Some examples in this direction are Buganza and Verganti (2006),  who suggested taking a lifecycle perspective, or moving outside the software devel- opment industry (e.g., Kandemir and Acur 2012; Meier and Kock 2021), while  questioning the role of individuals within these new processes (e.g., Ramesh et al.  2012; Sheffield and Lemétayer 2013). These are typical elements of a contingency  dimension of analysis, with a focus on contextual factors that aim for reductionist  simplicity, stability, and regulation (Mintzberg 1979). --- S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 Later in these years, a second wave of studies emerged related to the development  process based on agile principles. Indeed, the shift from software to new research  areas drew the attention of scholars toward a broader set of areas (Combe et  al.  2012; Battistella et al. 2017; Yuan et al. 2010). This allowed introducing the topic of  hybrid stage-gate methodologies showing that specific agile development processes  require specific components and the formalization and specialization of different  design factors (Cooper 2014; Cooper and Sommer 2016a, b). Challenging his foun- dational work, Cooper (1990) sought to revise the stage-gate model in light of new  market and business needs. Interestingly, he suggested the possibility of merging the traditional development  tool, stage-gate, with the new agile tools. This gave rise to the second wave of the  agile-as-a-tool literature stream, with various papers presenting new processes to  help a wider range of companies benefit from the agile approaches (Cooper 2014;  Cooper and Sommer 2016a, b). As in the case of the first wave, within a few years, researchers began to delve  deeply into these new agile approaches, for example, defining where stage-gate fits  better than agile and how they can be balanced (Bianchi et al. 2020), recognizing  hybrid roles (Ko and Kirsch 2017; Dziallas 2020), and showing hybrid outcomes in  project performance (Kosztyán and Szalkai 2018; Ghezzi and Cavallo 2020). 5.2  Agile‑as‑a‑culture The second theme that emerged from the text mining as a recurrent theme across  all the time frames considered is flexibility (MacCormack et al. 2001). Flexibility  can be accommodated by organizations in different ways, and the theoretical lens  discussed above seems to suggest that this second theme better fits the configuration  perspective (Meyer et al. 1993). Indeed, research on flexibility, by being more holis- tic in its inquiry, based on empirical observation and --- distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long  as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative  Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this  article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line  to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended  use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permis- sion directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/ licenses/by/4.0/. References Akgün AE, Byrne JC, Lynn GS, Keskin H (2007) New product development in turbulent environ- ments: impact of improvisation and unlearning on new product performance. J Eng Tech Manage  24:203–230 Annosi MC, Martini A, Brunetta F, Marchegiani L (2020) Learning in an agile setting: a multilevel  research study on the evolution of organizational routines. J Bus Res 110:554–566 Atkinson R, Crawford L, Ward S (2006) Fundamental uncertainties in projects and the scope of project  management. Int J Project Manage 24(8):687–698 Bäcklander G (2019) Doing complexity leadership theory: How agile coaches at Spotify practise ena- bling leadership. Creat Innovat Manage 28:42–60 Battistella C, De Toni AF, De Zan G, Pessot E (2017) Cultivating business model agility through focused  capabilities: a multiple case study. J Bus Res 73:65–82 Beck, K, Beedle M, van Bennekum A, Cockburn A, Fowler M, Grenning J, Highsmith J, Hunt A, Jeffries  R, Kern J, Marick B, Martin R, Mellor S, Schwaber K, Sutherland J, Thomas D (2001) Manifesto  for agile software development. Available at: https:// agile manif  esto. org/ --- 1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…Bellis P, Trabucchi D, Buganza T, Verganti R (2022) How do human relationships change in the digital  environment after COVID-19 pandemic? The road towards agility. Eur J Innov Manag 25:821–849 Biancani S, McFarland DA, Dahlander L (2014) The semiformal organization. Organ Sci 25:1306–1324 Bianchi M, Marzi G, Guerini M (2020) Agile, stage-gate and their combination: exploring how they  relate to performance in software development. J Bus Res 110:538–553 Bianchi M, Marzi G, Dabić M (2022) Guest editorial: agile beyond software—in search of flexibility in a  wide range of innovation projects and industries. IEEE Trans Eng Manage 69:3454–3458 Biesenthal C, Wilden R (2014) Multi–level project governance: trends and opportunities. Int J Project  Manage 32:1291–1308 Bock A, Opsahl T, George G, Gann DM (2012) The effects of culture and structure on strategic flexibility  during business model innovation. J Manage Stud 49:279–305 Bogers M, Foss NJ, Lyngsie J (2018) The “human side” of open innovation: the role of employee diver - sity in firm-level openness. Res Policy 47:218–231 Brand M, Tiberius V, Bican PM, Brem A (2021) Agility as an innovation driver: towards an agile front  end of innovation framework. RMS 15:157–187 Buganza T, Verganti R (2006) Life-cycle flexibility: how to measure and improve the innovative capabil- ity in turbulent environments. J Prod Innov Manag 23:393–407 Buhalis D, O’Connor P (2005) Information communication technology revolutionizing tourism. Tour  Recreat Res 30:7–16 Calabrò A, Vecchiarini M, Gast J, Campopiano G, De Massis A, Kraus S (2019) Innovation in family  firms: a systematic literature review and guidance for future research. Int J Manag Rev 21:317–355 Calantone R, Garcia R, Dröge C (2003) The effects of environmental turbulence on new product develop- ment strategy planning. J Prod Innov Manag 20:90–103 Campbell C, Pitt LF, Parent M, Berthon PR (2011) Understanding consumer --- Prod Innov Manag 20:90–103 Campbell C, Pitt LF, Parent M, Berthon PR (2011) Understanding consumer conversations around ads in  a Web 2.0 world. J Advert 40:87–102 Chirumalla K (2021) Building digitally-enabled process innovation in the process industries: a dynamic  capabilities approach. Technovation, 102256. Clauss T, Abebe M, Tangpong C, Hock M (2019) Strategic agility, business model innovation, and firm  performance: an empirical investigation. IEEE Trans Eng Manage 68:767–784 Combe IA, Rudd JM, Leeflang PSH, Greenley GE (2012) Antecedents to strategic flexibility: manage- ment cognition, firm resources and strategic options. Eur J Mark 46:1320–1339 Conforto EC, Amaral DC (2016) Agile project management and stage-gate model—a hybrid framework  for technology-based companies. J Eng Tech Manage 40:1–14 Conforto EC, Salum F, Amaral DC, da Silva SL, De Almeida LFM (2014) Can agile project management  be adopted by industries other than software development. Proj Manag J 45:21–34 Conforto EC, Amaral DC, da Silva SL, Di Felippo A, Kamikawachi DSL (2016) The agility construct on  project management theory. Int J Project Manage 34:660–674 Conz E, Lamb PW, De Massis A (2020) Practicing resilience in family firms: an investigation through  phenomenography. J Fam Bus Strat 11:100355 Cooper RG (1990) Stage–gate systems: a new tool for managing new products. Bus Horiz 33:44–54 Cooper RG (2014) What’s next? After stage-gate. Res Technol Manage 57:20–31 Cooper RG (2016) Agile-stage-gate hybrids. Res Technol Manag 59:21–29 Cooper RG (2017) Idea-to-launch gating systems: better, faster, and more agile. Res Technol Manage  60:48–52 Cooper RG (2019) The drivers of success in new product development. Ind Mark Manage 76:36–47 Cooper RG, Sommer AF (2016a) Agile-stage-gate: new idea-to-launch method for manufactured new  products is faster, more responsive. Ind Mark Manage 59:167–180 Cooper RG, Sommer AF (2016b) The agile-stage-gate hybrid model: a promising new approach and a  new --- Cooper RG, Sommer AF (2016b) The agile-stage-gate hybrid model: a promising new approach and a  new research opportunity. J Prod Innov Manage 33:513–526 Cooper RG, Sommer AF (2018) Agile-stage-gate for manufacturers. Res Technol Manage 61:17–26 Delery JE, Doty DH (1996) Modes of theorizing in strategic human resource management: tests of uni- versalistic, contingency, and configurational performance predictions. Acad Manag J 39:802–835 Doeze Jager-van Vliet SB, Born MP, van der Molen HT (2019) Using a portfolio-based process to  develop agility among employees. Hum Resour Dev Q 30:39–60 Dönmez D, Grote G, Brusoni S (2016) Routine interdependencies as a source of stability and flexibility.  A study of agile software development teams. Inf Organ 26:63–83 Doty DH, Glick WH, Huber GP (1993) Fit, equifinality, and organizational effectiveness: a test of two  configurational theories. Acad Manage J 36:1196–1250 --- S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 Drazin R, Van de Ven AH (1985) Alternative forms of fit in contingency theory. Adm Sci Q 30:514–539 Dziallas M (2020) How to evaluate innovative ideas and concepts at the front-end? A front-end perspec- tive of the automotive innovation process. J Bus Res 110:502–518 Euchner J (2017) Transformation for growth at GE: an interview with Viv Goldstein. Res Technol Man- age 60:14–19 Fecher F, Winding J, Hutter K, Füller J (2020) Innovation labs from a participants’ perspective. J Bus Res  110:567–576 Galbraith JR (2002) Organizing to deliver solutions. Organ Dyn 31:194–213 Gama F, Magistretti S (2023) Artificial intelligence in innovation management: a review of innovation  capabilities and a taxonomy of AI applications. J Prod Innov Manage. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ jpim.  12698 Gama F, Sjödin D, Parida V, Frishammar J, Wincent J (2021) Exploratory and exploitative capability  paths for innovation: a contingency framework for harnessing fuzziness in the front end. Technova- tion 113:102416 Ghezzi A (2019) Digital startups and the adoption and implementation of lean startup approaches: effec- tuation, bricolage and opportunity creation in practice. Technol Forecast Soc Chang 146:945–960 Ghezzi A, Cavallo A (2020) Agile business model innovation in digital entrepreneurship: lean startup  approaches. J Bus Res 110:519–537 Ghezzi A, Gabelloni D, Martini A, Natalicchio A (2018) Crowdsourcing: a review and suggestions for  future research. Int J Manage Rev 20:343–363 Ghosh S, Hughes M, Hodgkinson I, Hughes P (2021) Digital transformation of industrial businesses: a  dynamic capability approach. Technovation 113:102414 Grass A, Backmann J, Hoegl M (2020) From empowerment dynamics to team adaptability: exploring and  conceptualizing the continuous agile team innovation process. J Prod Innov Manage 37:324–351 Guinan PJ, Parise S, Langowitz N (2019) Creating an innovative digital project team: levers to enable  digital transformation. Bus --- N (2019) Creating an innovative digital project team: levers to enable  digital transformation. Bus Horiz 62:717–727 Harryson S, Kliknaite S, Dudkowski R (2008) Flexibility in innovation through external learning: explor - ing two models for enhanced industry-university collaboration. Int J Technol Manage 41:109–137 Hobbs B, Petit Y (2017) Agile methods on large projects in large organizations. Proj Manage J 48:3–19 Holahan PJ, Sullivan ZZ, Markham SK (2014) Product development as core competence: how formal  product development practices differ for radical, more innovative, and incremental product innova- tions. J Prod Innov Manage 31:329–345 Hoonsopon D, Puriwat W (2019) Organizational agility: key to the success of new product development.  IEEE Trans Eng Manage 68:1722–1733 Huikkola T, Kohtamäki M, Rabetino R, Makkonen H, Holtkamp P (2021) Overcoming the challenges of  smart solution development: co-alignment of processes, routines, and practices to manage product,  service, and software integration. Technovation 118:102382 Joshi AW, Sharma S (2004) Customer knowledge development: antecedents and impact on new product  performance. J Mark 68:47–59 Jovanovic M, Sjödin D, Parida V (2021) Co-evolution of platform architecture, platform services, and  platform governance: expanding the platform value of industrial digital platforms. Technovation  118:102218 Kandemir D, Acur N (2012) Examining proactive strategic decision-making flexibility in new product  development. J Prod Innov Manage 29:608–622 Keupp MM, Palmié M, Gassmann O (2012) The strategic management of innovation: a systematic review  and paths for future research. Int J Manage Rev 14:367–390 Ko D, Kirsch LJ (2017) The hybrid IT project manager: one foot each in the IT and business domains. Int  J Project Manage 35:307–319 Kok RAW, Ligthart PEM (2014) Differentiating major and incremental new product development: the  effects of functional and numerical workforce flexibility. J Prod Innov Manage 31:30–42 --- the  effects of functional and numerical workforce flexibility. J Prod Innov Manage 31:30–42 Korotka M, Bos-Nehles AC (2016) “Best” HRM-performance configurations? A critical review and  research agenda. Acad Manage Proc 1:10530 Kosztyán ZT, Szalkai I (2018) Hybrid time-quality-cost trade-off problems. Oper Res Perspect 5:306–318 Kraus S, Breier M, Dasí-Rodríguez S (2020) The art of crafting a systematic literature review in entrepre- neurship research. Int Entrepreneurship Manage J 16:1023–1042 Kraus S, Breier M, Lim WM, Dabić M, Kumar S, Kanbach D, Mukherjee D, Corvello V, Piñeiro-Chousa  J, Liguori E, Palacios-Marqués D (2022) Literature reviews as independent studies: guidelines for  academic practice. RMS 16:2577–2595 --- perspective on agile methodology use  and changing user requirements. Inf Syst Res 20:377–399 Mathies C, Burford M (2011) Customer service understanding: gender differences of frontline employ - ees. Manag Serv Qual Int J 21:636–648 Meier A, Kock A (2021) Agile R&D units’ organization beyond software—developing and validating a  multidimensional scale in an engineering context. IEEE Trans Eng Manage 69:3476–3488 Meyer AD, Tsui AS, Hinings CR (1993) Configurational approaches to organizational analysis. Acad  Manag J 36:1175–1195 Micheli P, Wilner SJ, Bhatti SH, Mura M, Beverland MB (2019) Doing design thinking: conceptual  review, synthesis, and research agenda. J Prod Innov Manag 36:124–148 Miles RE, Snow CC, Meyer AD, Coleman HJ Jr (1978) Organizational strategy, structure, and process.  Acad Manag Rev 3:546–562 Miller D (1981) Toward a new contingency approach: the search for organizational gestalts. J Manage  Stud 18:1–26 Miller D (2018) Challenging trends in configuration research: where are the configurations? Strateg  Organ 16:453–469 Mills AJ, Berthon PR, Pitt C (2020) Agile authorship: evolving models of innovation for information– intensive offerings. J Bus Res 110:577–583 Mintzberg H (1979) An emerging strategy of “direct” research. Adm Sci Q 24:582–589 Mintzberg H (1983) The case for corporate social responsibility. J Bus Strategy 4:3–15 Mishra AK, Mishera KE, Spreitzer GM (2009) Downsizing the company without downsizing morale.  MIT Sloan Manag Rev 50:39–44 Mollet LS, Kaudela-Baum S (2022) Critical HR capabilities in agile organisations: a cross-case analysis  in Swiss SMEs. RMS 17:2055–2075 Myers CG (2018) Coactive vicarious learning: toward a relational theory of vicarious learning in organi- zations. Acad Manag Rev 43:610–634 Nemkova E (2017) The impact of agility on the market performance of born-global firms: an exploratory  study of the ‘tech city’ innovation cluster. J Bus Res 80:257–265 Olsson NO (2006) Management of flexibility in projects. --- innovation cluster. J Bus Res 80:257–265 Olsson NO (2006) Management of flexibility in projects. Int J Project Manage 24:66–74 Ordanini A, Rubera G, DeFillippi R (2008) The many moods of inter-organizational imitation: a critical  review. Int J Manag Rev 10:375–398 Paluch S, Antons D, Brettel M, Hopp C, Salge T, Piller F, Wentzel D (2020) Stage-gate and agile devel- opment in the digital age: promises, perils, and boundary conditions. J Bus Res 110:495–501 Pangarso A, Sisilia K, Setyorini R, Peranginangin Y, Awirya AA (2022) The long path to achieving green  economy performance for micro small medium enterprise. J Innovat Entrepreneurship 11:1–19 --- S. Magistretti, D. Trabucchi  1 3 Pellizzoni E, Trabucchi D, Buganza T (2019) When agility meets open innovation: two approaches to  manage inbound projects. Creat Innovat Manage 28:464–476 Pisano GP (2015) You need an innovation strategy. Harv Bus Rev 93:44–54 Podsakoff PM, MacKenzie SB, Bachrach DG, Podsakoff NP (2005) The influence of management jour - nals in the 1980s and 1990s. Strateg Manag J 26:473–488 Powell A, Piccoli G, Ives B (2004) Virtual teams: a review of current literature and directions for future  research. ACM SIGMIS Database 35:6–36 Pullen AJ, de Weerd-Nederhof PC, Groen AJ, Fisscher OA (2012) Open innovation in practice: goal  complementarity and closed NPD networks to explain differences in innovation performance for  SMEs in the medical devices sector. J Prod Innov Manag 29:917–934 Raffaelli R, Glynn MA, Tushman M (2019) Frame flexibility: the role of cognitive and emotional framing  in innovation adoption by incumbent firms. Strateg Manag J 40:1013–1039 Ramesh B, Mohan K, Cao L (2012) Ambidexterity in agile distributed development: an empirical investi- gation. Inf Syst Res 23:323–339 Randhawa K, Wilden R, Hohberger J (2016) A bibliometric review of open innovation: setting a research  agenda. J Prod Innov Manag 33:750–772 Recker J, Holten R, Hummel M, Rosenkranz C (2017) How agile practices impact customer responsive- ness and development success: a field study. Proj Manag J 48:99–121 Rigby DK, Sutherland J, Cappelli P, Simon P (2020) Agile: tools for preparing your team for the future.  HBR Insights Series. Rooney D (2005) Knowledge, economy, technology and society: the politics of discourse. Telematics  Inform 22:405–422 Sanasi S, Manotti J, Ghezzi A (2022) Achieving agility in high-reputation firms: agile experimentation  revisited. IEEE Trans Eng Manage 69:3529–3545 Sarros JC, Cooper BK, Santora JC (2008) Building a climate for innovation through transformational  leadership and organizational culture. J Leadership Organ Stud --- innovation through transformational  leadership and organizational culture. J Leadership Organ Stud 15:145–158 Sauer PC, Seuring S (2023) How to conduct systematic literature reviews in management research: a  guide in 6 steps and 14 decisions. RMS 17:1899–1933 Savino T, Messeni Petruzzelli A, Albino V (2017) Search and recombination process to innovate: a  review of the empirical evidence and a research agenda. Int J Manag Rev 19:54–75 Sawhney M, Verona G, Prandelli E (2005) Collaborating to create: the internet as a platform for customer  engagement in product innovation. J Interact Mark 19:4–17 Schoemaker M (2003) Identity in flexible organizations: experiences in Dutch organizations. Creat Inno- vat Manage 12:191–201 Sergeeva N (2019) Towards more flexible approach to governance to allow innovation: the case of UK  infrastructure. Int J Manag Proj Bus 13:1–19 Serrador P, Pinto JK (2015) Does agile work? A quantitative analysis of agile project success. Int J Pro- ject Manag 33:1040–1051 Sharma S, Singh G, Jones P, Kraus S, Dwivedi YK (2022) Understanding agile innovation management  adoption for SMEs. IEEE Trans Eng Manage 69:3546–3557 Sheffield J, Lemétayer J (2013) Factors associated with the software development agility of successful  projects. Int J Project Manage 31:459–472 Snyder H (2019) Literature review as a research methodology: an overview and guidelines. J Bus Res  104:333–339 Sommer SC, Loch CH (2004) Selectionism and learning in projects with complexity and unforeseeable  uncertainty. Manage Sci 50:1334–1347 Spagnoletti P, Kazemargi N, Prencipe A (2021) Agile practices and organizational agility in software  ecosystems. IEEE Trans Eng Manage 69:3604–3617 Staniewski MW, Awruk K (2019) Entrepreneurial success and achievement motivation—a preliminary  report on a validation study of the questionnaire of entrepreneurial success. J Bus Res 101:433–440 Stettina CJ, Hörz J (2015) Agile portfolio management: an empirical perspective on the practice in --- Stettina CJ, Hörz J (2015) Agile portfolio management: an empirical perspective on the practice in use.  Int J Project Manage 33:140–152 Suddaby R (2010) Challenges for institutional theory. J Manag Inq 19:14–20 Tallon PP (2008) Inside the adaptive enterprise: an information technology capabilities perspective on  business process agility. Inf Technol Manage 9:21–36 Teece D, Peteraf M, Leih S (2016) Dynamic capabilities and organizational agility: risk, uncertainty, and  strategy in the innovation economy. Calif Manage Rev 58:13–35 --- 1 3Agile‑as‑a‑tool and agile‑as‑a‑culture: a comprehensive…Thornton SC, Henneberg SC, Leischnig A, Naudé P (2019) It’s in the mix: how firms configure resource  mobilization for new product success. J Prod Innov Manag 3:513–531 To CKM, Au JSC, Kan CW (2019) Uncovering business model innovation contexts: a comparative analy - sis by fsQCA methods. J Bus Res 101:783–796 Trabucchi D, Talenti L, Buganza T (2019) How do big bang disruptors look like? A business model per - spective. Technol Forecast Soc Chang 141:330–340 Tranfield D, Denyer D, Smart P (2003) Towards a methodology for developing evidence-informed man- agement knowledge by means of systematic review. Br J Manag 14:207–222 Tuomi I (2012) Foresight in an unpredictable world. Technol Anal Strat Manage 24:735–751 Turner R (2016) Gower handbook of project management. Routledge Valencia JCN, Valle RS, Jiménez DJ (2010) Organizational culture as determinant of product innovation.  Eur J Innov Manag 13:466–480 van der Meer-Kooistra J, Scapens RW (2008) The governance of lateral relations between and within  organisations. Manag Account Res 19:365–384 Verganti R (1999) Planned flexibility: linking anticipation and reaction in product development projects. J  Prod Innov Manag 16:363–376 Vrontis D, Belas J, Thrassou A, Santoro G, Christofi M (2023) Strategic agility, openness and perfor - mance: a mixed method comparative analysis of firms operating in developed and emerging mar - kets. RMS 17:1365–1398 Wei Z, Yi Y, Guo H (2014) Organizational learning ambidexterity, strategic flexibility, and new product  development. J Prod Innov Manag 31:832–847 Worren N, Moore K, Cardona P (2002) Modularity, strategic flexibility, and firm performance: a study of  the home appliance industry. Strateg Manag J 23:1123–1140 Xing Y, Liu Y, Boojihawon DK, Tarba S (2019) Entrepreneurial team and strategic agility: a conceptual  framework and research agenda. Hum Resour Manag Rev 30:100696 Yan K, Cheng TE, Li G, Wei Z (2019) Overcoming --- and research agenda. Hum Resour Manag Rev 30:100696 Yan K, Cheng TE, Li G, Wei Z (2019) Overcoming the service paradox by leveraging organizational  design and cultural factors: a combined configuration and contingency approach. IEEE Trans Eng  Manage 68:498–512 Yuan L, Zhongfeng S, Yi L (2010) Can strategic flexibility help firms profit from product innovation?  Technovation 30:300–309 Zaitsev A, Gal U, Tan B (2020) Coordination artifacts in agile software development. Inf Organ  30:100288 Zammuto RF, Griffith TL, Majchrzak A, Dougherty DJ, Faraj S (2007) Information technology and the  changing fabric of organization. Organ Sci 18:749–762 Zhang Z, Sharifi H (2007) Towards theory building in agile manufacturing strategy—a taxonomical  approach. IEEE Trans Eng Manage 54:351–370 Zhang F, Wang Y, Li D, Cui V (2017) Configurations of innovations across domains: an organizational  ambidexterity view. J Prod Innov Manag 34:821–841 Zomerdijk LG, Voss CA (2011) NSD processes and practices in experiential services. J Prod Innov  Manag 28:63–80 Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps  and institutional affiliations.
El artículo proporciona una revisión exhaustiva de los enfoques ágiles en la literatura de innovación y gestión. Se analiza la dicotomía entre las perspectivas de ágil como herramienta y ágil como cultura, así como la aplicación de teorías de contingencia y configuración para comprender los enfoques ágiles. Se destaca la evolución de la investigación ágil a lo largo del tiempo y se sugieren direcciones para investigaciones futuras. Los hallazgos ofrecen ideas valiosas tanto para académicos como para profesionales en la adopción de enfoques ágiles en las organizaciones.

El estudio examina la evolución de los enfoques ágiles en el desarrollo de productos y la cultura organizacional en el ámbito de la gestión empresarial y contabilidad desde 2002 hasta 2020. Se realiza un análisis detallado en ventanas de 3 años para resaltar las tendencias y cambios a lo largo del tiempo.

En el período de 2002-2004, se enfocó en el desarrollo y la flexibilidad, con énfasis en modelos, I+D, procesos y productos. Se resaltó la importancia de la tecnología como facilitador de cambios en los procesos de desarrollo y la necesidad de flexibilidad para adaptarse a las demandas del mercado.

En el período de 2005-2007, se continuó discutiendo el desarrollo y la flexibilidad, con énfasis en la tecnología como factor clave para impulsar nuevos enfoques en la gestión de proyectos. Se exploraron dimensiones como la improvisación y el desaprendizaje para abordar necesidades emergentes.

En el período de 2008-2010, se mantuvo la atención en el desarrollo y la flexibilidad, con enfoque en la interacción entre las habilidades de TI y la agilidad organizacional. Se examinaron los efectos de los enfoques ágiles en diversas medidas de rendimiento y la relación entre el rendimiento del producto y las solicitudes de cambio del cliente.

En el período de 2011-2013, se continuó explorando el impacto de los enfoques ágiles en el desarrollo de productos, con énfasis en la participación del cliente, los equipos multidisciplinarios y los enfoques iterativos. Se destacó la importancia de la cultura organizacional en la adopción de enfoques ágiles.

En el período de 2014-2016, se observó un cambio significativo en la estructura de los temas, con enfoque en la gestión de carteras y la integración de enfoques ágiles en industrias tradicionales. Se exploraron enfoques híbridos que combinan principios ágiles con enfoques tradicionales.

En el período de 2017-2020, se observó una evolución hacia un enfoque estratégico de la agilidad, con énfasis en la renovación continua y la flexibilidad organizacional. Se exploraron enfoques híbridos y se destacó la importancia de la agilidad en la toma de decisiones y la innovación continua.

En resumen, el texto resalta la importancia de la agilidad tanto como herramienta en el desarrollo de productos como cultura organizacional para enfrentar la incertidumbre y los cambios en el entorno empresarial.
