Frontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  1 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682ORIGINAL RESEARCH published: 09 May 2022 doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.832682 Edited by:  Jun Shen,   University of Wollongong, Australia Reviewed by:  Zubair Akram,   Zhejiang Gongshang University,  China Virginia Barba-Sánchez,   Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha,  Spain *Correspondence:  Lei Wang    122195466@163.com Specialty section:  This article was submitted to   Human-Media   Interaction,   a section of the journal   Frontiers in Psychology Received:  10 December 2021 Accepted:  31 January 2022 Published:  09 May 2022 Citation: Wang R, Zhou H and Wang L (2022)  The Influence of Psychological  Capital and Social Capital on the  Entrepreneurial Performance of the  New Generation of Entrepreneurs. Front. Psychol. 13:832682. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.832682The Influence of Psychological  Capital and Social Capital on the  Entrepreneurial Performance of the  New Generation of Entrepreneurs Ruoqi Wang 1, Haijun Zhou 2 and Lei Wang 1* 1 School of Information and Intelligent Engineering, Zhejiang Wanli University, Ningbo, China, 2 Zhejiang Security Vocational  and Technical College, Wenzhou, China To enable that the new generation of entrepreneurs can effectively use their own qualities  and abilities to improve the level of entrepreneurial performance, and to successfully pass  through the entrepreneurial period of the enterprise and achieve longer-term development,  the new generation of entrepreneurs is taken as the research object, and firstly, the  definition and interaction of psychological capital and entrepreneurial performance are  pointed out. Secondly, the questionnaires are designed with reference to the relevant  maturity scales, and the reliability, validity analysis, correlation analysis, and multiple linear  regression analysis of the collected effective questionnaires are carried out through SPSS  and AMOS software. Thirdly, on this basis, it verifies the influence of
carried out through SPSS  and AMOS software. Thirdly, on this basis, it verifies the influence of psychological capital  of the new generation entrepreneurs on entrepreneurial performance and the moderating  effect of entrepreneurial environment perception. The results show that there is a significant  positive correlation between the dimensions of psychological capital and entrepreneurial  performance. Gender, age, educational background, marital status, the establishment  time of enterprises, and the number of employees all have a significant impact on the  psychological capital of the new generation of entrepreneurs. Among them, the  psychological capital of the new generation of entrepreneurs aged 31–35 is the best,  followed by aged 26–30, 21–25, and the worst is 20 years old and below, which is logical.  The correlation coefficient between psychological capital and entrepreneurial performance,  social capital and entrepreneurial performance shows a significant positive correlation.  The research on the relationship between psychological capital, social capital, and  entrepreneurial performance of new generation entrepreneurs systematically explains why  some enterprises created by the new generation of entrepreneurs can achieve rapid  growth and deepen the research in related fields. Keywords: psychological capital, social capital, entrepreneurial performance, new generation of entrepreneurs,  deep learning
Frontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  2 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New Generation INTRODUCTION The rapid development of science and technology has promoted  the prosperity of the economy and the development of  different industries. A large number of entrepreneurs have  emerged from all walks of life. Taking “science and technology  leading economical development” as a spirit, social  entrepreneurs have greatly promoted the further development  of the economy of a region and the whole country to create  more updated employment opportunities. Nowadays,  entrepreneurial economy has become the main engine of  global economic growth ( Miao et  al., 2019 ; Stefanis, 2020 ).  With the increasing demand for entrepreneurship,  entrepreneurial activities are continuously emerging in society.  Therefore, research on entrepreneurship research has become  a very active research field in universities globally, covering  academic fields, such as economics, sociology, business  administration, and science ( Balboni et al., 2019 ; Silva et al.,  2020 ). Researchers in every field have their unique research  perspectives and have made great achievements in  studying entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship can promote sustainable economic growth  and play a significant important role in economic development.  In the current research, the research on entrepreneurship has  shifted from the trait theory to the cognitive perspective ( Oukes  et  al., 2019 ). Scholars have been searching for the factors that  affect entrepreneurs’ entrepreneurial ability and success. Different  people choose different research directions from which they  get their different answers. However, many studies have pointed  out that improving a company’s psychological capital is actually  very important to the success of entrepreneurship ( Lukes et al.,  2019 ). Numerous studies have shown that improving the  psychological capital of entrepreneurs is
2019 ). Numerous studies have shown that improving the  psychological capital of entrepreneurs is indeed of great  significance to successful entrepreneurship ( Osman et al., 2019 ;  Salerno, 2019 ). Psychological capital first appeared in the research  in 1997, after that, some scholars analyzed economic capital,  human capital, and social capital in entrepreneurship research,  emphasized people’s positive psychological strength from the  aspects of positive psychological behavior and positive  organization, and put forward the concept of “positive  psychological capital” ( Iazzolino et  al., 2019 ). Experts and  scholars are constantly studying and deepening this concept.  Psychological theory has gradually become an important research  topic in the field of active organizational behavior. To sum up, although the important influence of psychological  capital of entrepreneurs on entrepreneurial performance in the  entrepreneurial context is undeniable, the impact mechanism  of psychological capital of entrepreneurs on entrepreneurial  performance is still unknown. Therefore, the main research  purpose is to construct a theoretical model based on the  analysis of the psychological capital, social capital, and  entrepreneurial performance of the new generation of  entrepreneurs, and to effectively measure the psychological  capital, social capital, and entrepreneurial performance of the  new generation of entrepreneurs. From both direct and indirect  perspectives, the influence of psychological capital and social  capital on the entrepreneurial performance level of the new generation of entrepreneurs is analyzed, and then, relevant  countermeasures and suggestions are proposed. LITERATURE REVIEW Every new technological revolution will bring a new wave of  entrepreneurship. Those founders and partners who can seize  favorable opportunities and strive to obtain economic value  can be  regarded as entrepreneurs. Throughout the domestic  and foreign literature on the
value  can be  regarded as entrepreneurs. Throughout the domestic  and foreign literature on the definition of the concept of the  new generation of entrepreneurs, there is no authoritative and  unified definition. It is well known that the new generation  is divided based on sociology and demography. At present,  the most common definition of “new generation of employees”  is the employees born in the 1980s and 1990s, indicating that  age boundaries are the most common basis for dividing this  new generation group. Nowadays, foreign scholars Tkacz (2016)   defined entrepreneurs aged 35 and below as the new generation  of social entrepreneurs, while domestic scholars Zhao and Xu  (2015)  defined the new generation of entrepreneurs as  entrepreneurs born after 1985, indicating that the “post-85 s”  may indeed be  an age boundary for the new generation of  entrepreneurs. Lei (2018)  concluded that the psychological  capital of entrepreneurs has a greater impact on entrepreneurial  performance through the study of the relationship between  the university’s psychological capital of entrepreneurs and its  entrepreneurial performance. Chen et  al. (2019)  proposed that  psychological capital is an important psychological resource,  and using 446 new generations of migrant workers as a research  sample, the structural equation model was used to analyze  the relationship between psychological capital of new generation  of migrant workers and their entrepreneurial performance level  had a significant positive effect. By reviewing relevant studies,  it showed that psychological capital mainly plays a positive  role in entrepreneurial performance. Li (2018)  analyzed the  entrepreneurial data of migrant workers in 13 cities in eastern  China and found that China should build a social capital  generation and accumulation mechanism for migrant workers  in relevant cities as soon as possible, to promote the improvement  of the urban entrepreneurial performance of migrant
soon as possible, to promote the improvement  of the urban entrepreneurial performance of migrant workers.  Y ang and Wang (2019)  used the survey data related to the  entrepreneurship of immigrants in the Three Georges Reservoir  and concluded that social capital significantly promoted the  improvement of the entrepreneurial performance of immigrants.  Ma and Wang (2018)  used the dual perspectives of social  capital and psychological capital to propose the influence of  social capital and psychological capital on the entrepreneurial  performance of migrant workers. The results showed that social  capital and psychological capital are positively correlated with  the entrepreneurial performance level of migrant workers.  Barba-Sánchez and Atienza-Sahuquillo (2017)  implemented a  theoretical model based on expectation theory to explain the  motivation and ability of individual entrepreneurs. The results  indicated that expectations, tools, and value of expectations  could enhance entrepreneurial motivation. From the review  of relevant studies, they showed that there were relatively few
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  3 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682studies on the influence of psychological capital and social  capital on entrepreneurial performance. Social capital is a  productive resource that can promote cooperation among the  new generation of entrepreneurs. Good psychological capital  can help to improve the social skills of entrepreneurs, and it  is also of great help for entrepreneurs to improve their  entrepreneurial performance. And scholars generally believe  that the social capital of entrepreneurs significantly promotes  the improvement of their entrepreneurial performance. However,  there is no consensus on how the various dimensions of more  specific social capital affect the various dimensions of  entrepreneurial performance, and scholars need to conduct  more in-depth research in the future. RELEVANT THEORIES AND METHODS The Concept of Psychological Capital Many studies have proved that psychological factors will affect  enterprise performance. Wu and Wu (2019)  pointed out in  the research that the results showed that the positive emotions  of employees play an intermediary role in the positive role of  supervisors in expressing the positive emotions of employees’  work engagement; work engagement will promote the positive  influence of employees’ positive emotions on their innovative  behavior. Employees’ negative emotions will promote the influence  of supervisors’ negative emotions on employees’ superficial  behavior and innovative behavior. Introduction is made to the  concept of psychological capital, and discussion is focused on  the influence of psychological capital in the process of starting  a business ( Albright, 2019 ; Mas and Paoloni, 2019 ). According  to different forms of development, capital can be  divided into  three types, namely, economic capital, human capital, and social  capital. As the name implies, economic capital refers to
capital, human capital, and social  capital. As the name implies, economic capital refers to tangible  assets, such as capital and property, owned by people. Human  capital refers to the total value of labor (including physical  labor and mental labor) attached to human body’s physical  strength and intelligence ( Chambers et al., 2019 ; Aagaard et al.,  2020 ). Social capital refers to the association between individuals  or groups-social network, reciprocal norms, and the resulting  trust. It is the sum of resources brought by people’s position  in the social structure. In the existing research, there are many literatures that focus  on the influence of economic capital, human capital, and social  capital on work and entrepreneurship. However, more and  more managers and scholars realize that with the rapid  development of global economy, the competition among  enterprises is also intensifying. In the past, only through the  traditional human capital and social capital for investment and  development, it is not enough to maintain the strong competition  of enterprises ( Alexander and Fry, 2019 ; Webber et  al., 2020 ).  Therefore, there are more and more studies on positive  psychological resources, and many empirical research results  have been obtained. Figure 1  shows the four capitals recognized  by academia to enhance the competitive advantages of individuals  and organizations.The structure and meaning of psychological capital strengthen  and supplement each other, namely, they play a complementary  role ( Badakhshian and Samiee, 2020 ). On one hand, strengthening  the scientific connotation of psychological capital can play an  auxiliary role in improving the structure of psychological capital;  on the other hand, supplementing and optimizing the structure  of psychological capital can play a feedback role in understanding  the connotation of psychological capital, thereby developing  more tools for measuring psychological capital. At present, there is no
thereby developing  more tools for measuring psychological capital. At present, there is no unified conclusion about the  composition of psychological capital, but in theory, the definition  of psychological capital mainly involves four aspects, namely,  self-efficacy, optimism, hope, and resilience ( Anglin et al., 2018 ;  Sherman, 2019 ). The development and definition of psychological  capital theory focuses on three main aspects: trait theory, state  theory, and integration theory. Concepts Related to Entrepreneurial  Performance In many current studies, there is no clear definition of  entrepreneurial performance. But through summarizing previous  studies, it can be  found that entrepreneurial performance is  usually evaluated and measured by the impact of new enterprises.  Different researchers have given different definitions of  entrepreneurial performance ( Harms et al., 2018 ). Some researchers  believe that the study of entrepreneurial performance must  consider the social and internal environment closely related to  entrepreneurial success. Some researchers believe that  entrepreneurial achievements are various and are the result of  an organization reaching a certain degree. Entrepreneurial  performance is systematic. Only by starting from three aspects:  entrepreneurship, entrepreneurial team, and entrepreneurial  environment can scholars find suitable indicators. When  entrepreneurs participate in entrepreneurial activities, they will  show a lot of entrepreneurial behavior. These entrepreneurial  behaviors should be  regularly monitored and evaluated, because  only the correct entrepreneurial behavior can produce good  results ( Kang and Busser, 2018 ; Obschonka et al., 2020 ). Generally  speaking, entrepreneurial performance is a collection of the total  achievements and results achieved by entrepreneurial organizations  (Linton and Kask, 2017 ; Pan et  al., 2019 ). Entrepreneurial  performance of a new generation of entrepreneurs is a general
et  al., 2019 ). Entrepreneurial  performance of a new generation of entrepreneurs is a general  term for the achievements and efficiency that new enterprises  can achieve in the entrepreneurial process, and is one of the  most important indicators of entrepreneurial theory ( Miller et al.,  2019 ; Desai and Dearmond, 2021 ). There are three common  indicators for monitoring entrepreneurial performance, which  are financial indicators, performance indicators, and objective  indicators. Financial indicators are an intuitive way to measure  performance, and data are easy to obtain. Sales growth, return  on investment, return on assets, price, and other effective  information can be  obtained through the company’s financial  statements. However, when data are applied to specific research,  it will be  adjusted according to actual needs. Performance indicators are factors used to determine the  performance of entity objects. It is an important part of
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  4 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682performance appraisal task, which is reflected in behavior index  and result index. Behavioral indicators refer to employees’  behavior in the workplace, while performance indicators refer  to specific changes in work and organization due to workers’  work ( Qasim and Jader, 2021 ). Key performance indicators,  also known as key performance indicators (KPIs), are an  objective quantitative management indicator, which measures  process performance by defining, sampling, calculating, and  analyzing key parameters of internal process input and output. Application of Psychological Capital  Theory As the promoter and main participant of entrepreneurial  activities, entrepreneurs have great influence on entrepreneurial  performance. The research on entrepreneur personality paradigm  is widespread in related fields, but there are few consistent  conclusions ( Arias et al., 2018 ; Zhou et al., 2019 ). It is difficult  to describe entrepreneurship in the general sense with stable  personal characteristics. Therefore, many researchers transform  these personal characteristics. Self-efficacy, the ability to seize  the opportunity, cognitive motivation, and other concepts are  used to describe the characteristics of a people. Psychological  capital, economic capital, human capital, and social capital are  the factors that jointly promote the success of enterprises, while  psychological capital controls the extended capital model that  provides competitive advantage. Someone can achieve greater  success as an entrepreneur by better adjusting economic, human,  and social capital. Entrepreneurial performance is the general  name of entrepreneurial organization performance. Researchers  still face many challenges in measuring entrepreneurial  performance. It is difficult to obtain objective and reliable  entrepreneurial performance
performance. It is difficult to obtain objective and reliable  entrepreneurial performance data, and it is difficult to compare  and analyze several research results in detail. However, the  social capital of the new generation of entrepreneurs is generally  recognized in significantly improving enterprise performance,  so social capital has become an important predictor of enterprise  performance. While, there is no consensus on how different aspects of social capital will affect entrepreneurial performance.  As the selected intermediate variables or adjustment variables  are limited. Therefore, further analysis and research should  be  carried out on related intermediate variables or regulatory  variables ( Barba-Sánchez et  al., 2022 ). Theoretical Models and Assumptions Based on the theory of psychological and social capital, a  theoretical research model of psychological and social capital  mechanism for entrepreneurial performance of new generation  entrepreneurs is constructed from three aspects: research level,  path, and main factors. The research level has two parts:  psychological capital and social capital. The research path is  the main influence of psychological and social capital on  entrepreneurial performance. The perception of entrepreneurial  environment lies in the slow release of psychological and social  capital’s influence on corporate performance. The main factors  include psychological capital and social capital. Figure 2  displays  the theoretical model. The variables contained in the model are as: Independent variable: psychological capital: self-confidence,  hope, tenacity, and optimism. Social capital: structure,  relationship, and perception. Alternative variables: entrepreneurial awareness,  entrepreneurial culture awareness, entrepreneurial incentive  awareness, entrepreneurial support awareness, etc. Knowledge: market network knowledge and non-market  network knowledge. Dependent variables: Entrepreneurial performance has two
and non-market  network knowledge. Dependent variables: Entrepreneurial performance has two  aspects: survival performance and growth performance. Control variables: including gender, age, education level,  marital status, previous entrepreneurial experience, industry,  establishment time, and number of employees. Research Hypothesis The theory of psychological capital emphasizes a positive  psychological force of individuals. The concept of psychological  Economic  capitalHuman capital Social capitalPsychological   capita l What do you  haveWhat do you  knowWho do you  knowWho are you Funds and  tangible assetsExperience Skill  Knowledge  ConceptRelationship  work network  friendSelf-confidence  hope optimistic   and self-willed FIGURE 1 |  Four major capital forms.
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  5 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682capital is derived from positive organizational behavior. Positive  organizational behavior is the study and application of human  resource advantages and mental abilities that are positively oriented,  measurable, developable, and effectively manageable to improve  workplace performance. Positive psychological states, such as  self-confidence, hope, resilience, and optimism, have become the  main research objects of positive organizational behavior because  they meet their standards. Therefore, academics generally agree  that psychological capital is mainly composed of four dimensions:  self-confidence, hope, resilience, and optimism. On the basis of  this, studying and applying the psychological capital advantages  and abilities of the new generation of entrepreneurs can also  improve their entrepreneurial performance. Among them, self- confidence refers to the belief that oneself adjusts cognitive  patterns and takes actions to accomplish work goals. Confidence,  hope, resilience, and optimism in the psychological capital of  entrepreneurs can significantly promote the development of various  entrepreneurial activities. Psychological capital helps to improve  entrepreneurs’ social ability and communication skills, which is  also of great help for entrepreneurs to improve their entrepreneurial  performance. Based on the above theoretical analysis, it is inferred  that entrepreneurs with positive psychological capital have  significant psychological advantages in determining entrepreneurial  goals, exploring entrepreneurial opportunities, overcoming various  entrepreneurial difficulties, stimulating the entrepreneurial potential  of the organization, etc. This psychological advantage will promote  entrepreneurs to carry out various entrepreneurial activities,  thereby enhancing their entrepreneurial
to carry out various entrepreneurial activities,  thereby enhancing their entrepreneurial performance.Therefore, it is hypothesized as: H1: Psychological capital has a significant positive effect  on entrepreneurial performance. H1a:  Confidence has a significant positive effect on  survival performance. H1b:  Hope has a significant positive effect on  survival performance. H1c:  Resilience has a significant positive effect on  survival performance. H1d:  Optimism has a significant positive effect on  survival performance. H1e:  Confidence has a significant positive effect on  growth performance. H1f:  Hope has a significant positive effect on  growth performance. ToughPsychol ogical  capital Social capi talEntrepreneurial  environment perception Entrepreneurial  performancehope confidence optimism Structural  dimension Relationship  dimensionCognit ive  dimensionSurvival  performance Performance gr owth FIGURE 2 |  Research model of psychological capital, social capital, and entrepreneurial performance.
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  6 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682H1g:  Resilience has a significant positive effect on  growth performance. H1h:  Optimism has a significant positive effect on  growth performance positive influence. Social capital helps the new generation of entrepreneurs to  obtain the resources and information needed for entrepreneurship,  helps to promote the success of entrepreneurship, and then  improves their entrepreneurial performance. Therefore, it is hypothesized as: H2: Social capital has a significant positive impact on  entrepreneurial performance. H2a:  Structural dimension has a significant positive  impact on survival performance. H2b:  Relationship dimension has a significant positive  impact on survival performance. H2c:  Cognitive dimension has a significant positive  impact on survival performance. H2d:  Structural dimension has a significant positive  impact on growth performance. H2e:  Relationship dimension has a significant positive  impact on growth performance. H2f:  Cognitive dimension has a significant positive  impact on growth performance. Entrepreneurs perceive different entrepreneurial environments,  and psychological capital has different effects on their  entrepreneurial performance. In a good entrepreneurial  environment, the role of social capital will decrease for  entrepreneurs, while the impact of psychological capital on  entrepreneurial performance will increase. This is because a  good entrepreneurial environment is conducive to the  accumulation of psychological capital. On a good material basis,  the role of a positive psychological state is particularly obvious.  The better the psychological capital, the higher the level of  entrepreneurial performance. On the contrary, in a poor  entrepreneurial environment, the urgent need for entrepreneurial  capital of basic material will greatly enhance the role of social  capital.
for entrepreneurial  capital of basic material will greatly enhance the role of social  capital. Meanwhile, the entrepreneurial environment is not  conducive to the accumulation of psychological capital and  may even reduce psychological capital, and the significance of  psychological capital is also greatly weakened.Therefore, it is hypothesized as: H3: Perception of the entrepreneurial environment plays  a moderating role between psychological capital and  entrepreneurial performance. The better the perception  of the entrepreneurial environment, the stronger the  relationship between psychological capital and  entrepreneurial performance. H3a:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between self-confidence and  survival performance, and the better the perception of  the entrepreneurial environment, the stronger  the effect. H3b:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between hope and survival  performance. The better the perception of the  entrepreneurial environment, the stronger the effect. H3c:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between resilience and survival  performance, and the better the perception of the  entrepreneurial environment, the stronger the effect. H3d:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between optimism and survival  performance. The better the perception of the  entrepreneurial environment, the stronger the effect. H3e:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between self-confidence and  growth performance. The better the perception of the  entrepreneurial environment, the stronger the effect. H3f:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between hope and growth  performance. The better the perception of the  entrepreneurial environment, the stronger the effect. H3g:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role
stronger the effect. H3g:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between resilience and growth  performance, and the better the perception of the  entrepreneurial environment, the stronger the effect. H3h:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between optimism and growth  performance. The better the perception of the  entrepreneurial environment, the stronger the effect.
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  7 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682The entrepreneurial environment perceived by  entrepreneurs is different, and the degree of influence of  social capital on their entrepreneurial performance will also  be  different. When perceiving a relatively complete  entrepreneurial environment, such as policies, finance,  commerce, hardware facilities, services, and culture,  entrepreneurs can usually obtain the basic material and  capital required for starting a business relatively easily;  simultaneously, the dependence on social capital will be less.  Conversely, in a poor perception of the entrepreneurial  environment, entrepreneurs often have to strengthen social  capital to better obtain the basic material and capital required  for their own business, and their dependence on social  capital will be  greater. Therefore, favorable perception of  the entrepreneurial environment plays a negative moderating  role in the impact of social capital on entrepreneurial   performance. Therefore, it is hypothesized as: H4: Perception of the entrepreneurial environment plays  a moderating role between social capital and  entrepreneurial performance. The better the perception  of the entrepreneurial environment, the weaker the  relationship between social capital and  entrepreneurial performance. H4a:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between the structural  dimension and survival performance. The better the  perception of the entrepreneurial environment, the  weaker the effect. H4b:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between relational dimension  and survival performance, the better the perception of  the entrepreneurial environment, the weaker the effect. H4c:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between cognitive dimension  and survival performance. The better
plays a moderating role between cognitive dimension  and survival performance. The better the perception of  the entrepreneurial environment, the weaker the effect. H4d:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between the structural  dimension and growth performance. The better the  perception of the entrepreneurial environment, the  weaker the effect. H4e:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between relationship dimension  and growth performance, the better the perception of  the entrepreneurial environment, the weaker the effect.H4f:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between cognitive dimension  and growth performance. The better the perception of  the entrepreneurial environment, the weaker the effect. Through comparison, it shows that in different entrepreneurial  environments, psychological capital and social capital have  different degrees of vital influence on entrepreneurial  performance, that is, the entrepreneurial environment has played  a moderating role in this process. Questionnaire Design 1. Psychological capital questionnaire design The research divides psychological capital into four  dimensions: confidence, hope, resilience, and optimism. Self- confidence refers to the positive belief in the cognitive model  being adjusted and taking actions to achieve the task objectives.  It is a positive state based on personal experience and formed  by the intersection of success factors and realization paths.  Resilience refers to an individual’s ability to recover quickly  from adversity, conflict, and frustration. Optimism is a tendency  of positive attribution. Some positive situations are attributed  to permanence and universality, while some negative events  are attributed to temporality. 2. Social capital questionnaire design It is believed that social capital has three dimensions:  structure, relationship, and cognition. Dimension refers to
social capital has three dimensions:  structure, relationship, and cognition. Dimension refers to  various types of connections among participants in social  activities. Relationship refers to the relationship model produced  by people in their interactions. Cognition represents the common  goal among different members and cultures. Likert’s 5-point  scoring system is adopted to calculate scores from “very different”  to “very agree. ” 3. Entrepreneurial performance questionnaire Entrepreneurial performance questionnaire has two  dimensions to measure entrepreneurial performance, namely,  survival performance and growth performance, because the  characteristic of entrepreneurial performance is that new activities  of enterprises must survive before they can develop. Survival  items range from “very different” to “very agreed, ” with scores  ranging from 1 to 5. Growth performance ranges from “far  below the industry average” to “far above the industry average, ”  with scores ranging from 1 to 5. 4. Questionnaires of entrepreneurial environment awareness Entrepreneurial environment can be divided into five aspects:  enterprise culture, enterprise incentive, enterprise support,  market network, and non-market network. Based on the above  five aspects, a design is made on the perceptual measure of  entrepreneurial environment. Likert’s five-point scoring method  is used for the cultural cognition of entrepreneurship, ranging  from “very inconsistent” to “very consistent, ” with a score  ranging from 1 to 5 points. Data Sources and Hypothesis Testing The methods of questionnaire and empirical analysis are used,  among which the software of SPSS 23.0 and AMOS 23.0 is
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  8 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682used for data analysis. Based on descriptive statistical analysis,  Cronbach’s alpha coefficient and validation factor analysis are  used to test the reliability and validity of each variable. Then,  to understand the relationship between the entrepreneurial  performance of enterprises in detail, correlation analysis on  psychological capital, social capital, and entrepreneurial  performance is carried out. The questionnaire is distributed in two forms: paper  questionnaire and online questionnaire. The new generation  of entrepreneurs from multiple entrepreneurial bases fills in  the questionnaire (the new generation of entrepreneurs mainly  come from Chuangkebang Incubation Base, Jiangning District,  Nanjing City, Jiangsu Province, Pioneer Building, High-tech  Zone, Jiangning City, Life Science and Technology Town, Nanjing  City, E-commerce Industrial Park, Jiangning City, and other  entrepreneurial bases). It involves all walks of life, including  the Internet, finance, manufacturing, and business services and  limits the age of population variables, and the age of the  target must be  under 35. A total of 500 questionnaires are  distributed in this survey, and 472 questionnaires are recovered,  with a recovery rate of 94.4%. Among them, 438 valid  questionnaires can be  used as sample analysis, and the final  valid questionnaire rate is 87.6%. The basic information part  of the respondents in the questionnaire, including gender, age,  education, and marital status, as well as related entrepreneurial  information, including the industry to which the enterprise  belongs, the time of the establishment of the enterprise, the  number of employees of the enterprise, the number of previous  entrepreneurial experiences, the main motivation of  entrepreneurship, and the factors that are considered to have  a greater impact on
motivation of  entrepreneurship, and the factors that are considered to have  a greater impact on entrepreneurship. Table  1  shows the  descriptive statistical analysis results of the effective recovery  of samples. QUESTIONNAIRE SURVEY AND  ANALYSIS RESULTS Pre-survey Results of Questionnaire Questionnaires are collected and selected before the survey.  They are analyzed to confirm the reliability. Cronbach’s alpha  factor is selected for testing. Figure  3  shows the results of  psychological capital reliability analysis. As Figure  3  signifies, according to the corrected item-total  correlation (CITC) value, the values of confidence, hope, resilience,  and optimism in the psychological capital scale are all greater  than 0.5. Deleting any one of them will lower the Cronbach’s  alpha coefficient of the dimension, which indicates that the  correlation between these dimensions is relatively high. Cronbach’s  alpha values of the four dimensions are 0.766, 0.800, 0.821, and  0.851, respectively. Generally speaking, the higher the coefficient,  the higher the reliability of the tool. In basic research, the reliability  should be  at least 0.80, while in exploratory research, it can  be  accepted as long as it reaches 0.70. The reliability between  0.70 and 0.98 is high, while the reliability below 0.35 is at a low  level. Therefore, the reliability of the four dimensions is very high.TABLE 1 |  Descriptive statistical analysis of samples. Item Category Number of  PeoplePercentage   (%) Gender Male 225 51.4 Female 213 48.6 Age 20 years old and  below5713.0 21–25 years old 80 18.2 26–30 years old 71 16.3 31–35 years old 230 52.5 Education High school and  below143.3 college 55 12.5 Undergraduate 221 50.5 Graduate and above 148 33.7 Marital status Married 247 56.5 Unmarried 191 43.5 Industry the enterprise  belongs toAgriculture, Forestry,  Animal Husbandry,  Fishing40.8 Mining industry 4 0.8 Manufacturing 40 9.2 Electricity, heat, etc. 8 1.9 Construction
Fishing40.8 Mining industry 4 0.8 Manufacturing 40 9.2 Electricity, heat, etc. 8 1.9 Construction  industry153.5 Wholesale and retail  trade184.1 Transportation 21 4.9 Accommodation  and catering  industry112.4 Computer 78 17.7 Finance 42 9.5 Scientific research 14 3.3 Public Utilities 2 0.5 Service 11 2.4 Real estate 13 3.0 lease 10 2.2 Health care 12 2.7 Education 53 12.0 Culture and Sports 44 10.1 other 38 9.0 The time of the  establishment of the  enterpriseWithin 1 year 69 15.7 1–3 years 111 25.3 3–5 years 57 13.0 5–10 years 53 12.0 10+ years 148 34.0 The number of employees  of the enterprise10 people or less 136 31.0 11–50 people 83 19.0 51–100 people 48 10.9 101–200 people 30 6.8 More than 200  people141 32.3 The number of  entrepreneurial experiences0 274 62.5 1 time 94 21.5 More than 2 times 70 16.0 The motivation of  entrepreneurshipImprove living  quality11325.8 Improve quality of life 7 1.6 Realize personal  ideals26360.1 Conform to the  trend of social  development204.6 Other 35 7.9 (Continued)
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  9 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682Figure 4  denotes the results of social capital reliability analysis. As Figure 4  illustrates, the social capital scale includes three  dimensions: structure, relationship, and cognition, and the CITC  values of the items corresponding to these dimensions are all  above 0.5, which indicates that the correlation between these  dimensions is relatively high. From the overall Cronbach’s alphas  coefficient, the total Cronbach’s alphas coefficients of the three  dimensions are 0.872, 0.895, and 0.798, respectively, which  indicates that the reliability of these three dimensions has  reached a relatively high level. Figure 5  implies the reliability analysis results of entrepreneurship  performance scale. As Figure 5  shows, the Entrepreneurship Performance Scale  contains only two dimensions, namely, survival performance  and growth performance. The CITC values of all factors in  the two dimensions are greater than 0.5, and removing any  one of them will reduce the Cronbach’s alpha coefficient of  the dimension, which means that the correlation between these dimensions is relatively high. Among them, the overall Cronbach’s  alpha of survival and growth dimensions are 0.864 and 0.888,  respectively. It shows that the two-dimensional scale of  entrepreneurial performance has good reliability. Figure 6  reveals the reliability analysis results of entrepreneurship  perception scale. On the scale of entrepreneurial environment awareness,  evaluation is made from five aspects: entrepreneurial culture  awareness, entrepreneurial incentive awareness, entrepreneurial  support awareness, market network awareness, and non-market  network entrepreneurial awareness. From the CITC values of  these dimensions, all dimensions have reached more than 0.5.  When one of the dimension factors is eliminated, the Cronbach’s  alpha factor of the
than 0.5.  When one of the dimension factors is eliminated, the Cronbach’s  alpha factor of the dimension will decrease, which shows that  the correlation between these factors is relatively high. Overall,  Cronbach’s alpha coefficients of the five dimensions are 0.757,  0.804, 0.864, 0.792, and 0.747, respectively. Therefore, the  reliability of results is relatively good. Analysis Results of Questionnaire Survey  Data Figure  7  signifies reliability analysis results of the scale. According to the reliability analysis results shown in Figure 7 ,  Cronbach’s Alpha coefficients of the four scales are all above  0.8, and the reliability is acceptable as long as it reaches 0.70,  and the reliability between 0.70 and 0.98 is high, so the reliability  is relatively good and the internal consistency is relatively high.  The four-part table can be  used herein. Figure 8  presents the validity analysis results of the four scales. As Figure  8  presents, the absolute fitting index (2/df) of  the four groups of scales is less than 3. The fitness of GFI is  greater than 0.9, the approximate errors of RMR and RMSEA  of RMS residuals are both less than 0.08, and the NFI and TABLE 1 |  Continued Item Category Number of  PeoplePercentage   (%) Influencing factors of  entrepreneurshipHome and school 56 12.8 Optimism 42 9.5 Social support 56 12.8 Self-confidence 45 10.3 Entrepreneurial  team17339.4 Tough character 46 10.6 Other 20 4.6 PCC6 PCH6 PCR6 PCO60.550.600.650.700.750.800.850.900.95Numerical valu e Dime nsion CITC  Cronbach,s Alpha1  Cronbach,s Alpha FIGURE 3 |  Reliability analysis of psychological capital (PCC6 represents six  evaluation factors of psychological capital confidence dimension, PCH6  represents six evaluation factors of hope dimension, PCR6 represents six  evaluation factors of tenacity dimension, and PCO6 represents six evaluation  factors of optimism dimension).SCS3S CR3 SCC30.700.750.800.850.900.95Numerical valu e Dime nsion CITC  Cronbach,s Alpha1
CR3 SCC30.700.750.800.850.900.95Numerical valu e Dime nsion CITC  Cronbach,s Alpha1  Cronbach,s Alpha FIGURE 4 |  Reliability analysis of social capital (SCS3 represents three  evaluation factors of social capital structure dimension, SCR3 represents  three evaluation factors of relationship dimension, and SCC3 represents three  evaluation factors of cognitive dimension).
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  10 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682CFI after mass relative adjustment are both greater than 0.90,  which meet the standards of various indexes. Based on the  above indexes, the fitting degree of the model is improved,  which proves that the measurement is more effective, and these  values are in line with each index standard. Based on the  above indexes, it can be  proved that the model has good  fitting effect and high measurement validity. In order to verify the differences in psychological capital, social  capital, and entrepreneurial performance of factors, such as gender,  age, educational background, marital status, enterprise establishment  time, and number of employees, a design is made on independent  sample T-test to conduct multiple variable analysis, respectively.  Figure  9  displays the results of independent sample T-test. In the independent sample T-test results shown in Figure 9 ,  the significant levels of psychological capital of the three variables  are all less than 0.05, indicating that there are significant  differences in psychological capital between male and female  entrepreneurs in the new generation. Relatively speaking, the  level of entrepreneurial psychological capital of men is higher  than that of women, and the average value of 3.9724 is higher  than that of 3.7561 female entrepreneurs. The significant level  of social capital and entrepreneurial performance is above 0.05,  which indicates that there is no significant difference between  social capital and entrepreneurial performance of new generation  male and female entrepreneurs. The multiple comparison results of psychological capital and  entrepreneurial performance under age differences are shown  in Figure  10 . As shown in Figure  10 , young entrepreneurs of a certain  age group show significant differences in psychological capital  and entrepreneurial
of a certain  age group show significant differences in psychological capital  and entrepreneurial performance, and the concrete embodiment  of the differences can be observed when comparing the average differences. The order of psychological capital of new generation  entrepreneurs from high to low is 31–35 years old, 26–30 years  old, and 21–25 years old, and entrepreneurs under 20 years old  have the lowest psychological capital. But from the perspective  of entrepreneurial performance, the new generation of  entrepreneurs aged 26–30 perform best as entrepreneurs, followed  by entrepreneurs aged 31–35, 21–25, and under 20. Figure  11  shows the multiple comparison results of  psychological capital under educational background differences. The results in Figure  11  show whether there are significant  differences in psychological capital among specific entrepreneurs  from different backgrounds, and the specific differences can  be  obtained by comparing the average values. From the  comparison results in Figure  11 , the new generation  entrepreneurs with master’s degree or above rank first in  psychological capital, second in psychological capital of  entrepreneurs with high school education or below, and third  in college education. Undergraduate entrepreneurs have the  lowest psychological capital. Figure  12  indicates multiple comparisons of psychological  capital of new generation entrepreneurs with different  establishment times. As shown in Figure  12 , when starting a business, the new  generation entrepreneurs set up companies with significant  differences in entrepreneurial performance according to different  time groups and find out the specific differences by comparing  the average differences. From the comparison results, it can  be  seen that the new generation of entrepreneurs who have  been in business for more than 10 years have the best  entrepreneurial performance, and those who have been in  business for 1–3 years rank second. Enterprises
performance, and those who have been in  business for 1–3 years rank second. Enterprises with a start-up  time of 3–5 years rank third, those with a start-up time of ESP2E PG2 EPG40.700.720.740.760.780.800.820.840.860.880.90Numerical valu e Dime nsion CITC  Cronbach,s Alpha1  Cronbach,s Alpha FIGURE 5 |  Reliability analysis results of entrepreneurial performance scale  (ESP2 represents two evaluation factors of survival performance in  entrepreneurial performance, EPG2 represents the first two evaluation factors  of growth performance dimension, and EPG4 represents four evaluation  factors of growth performance dimension).EEC3 EEI3E ES2E EM3E EN20.550.600.650.700.750.800.850.900.95Numerical valu e Dimension CITC  Cronbach,s Alpha1  Cronbach,s Alpha FIGURE 6 |  Reliability analysis results of entrepreneurial environment  perception scale (EEC3 indicates three evaluation factors of entrepreneurial  culture in entrepreneurial environment, EEI3 indicates three evaluation factors  of entrepreneurial incentive, EES2 indicates two evaluation factors of  entrepreneurial support, EEM3 indicates three evaluation factors of market  network, and EEN2 indicates two evaluation factors of non-market network).
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  11 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 8326825–10 years rank fourth, and those with a start-up time of 1 year  or less rank last. Figure  13  reveals a multiple comparison of the number  of entrepreneurs. Figure  13  signifies the specific differences of psychological  capital of new generation entrepreneurs among groups with  different entrepreneurial experiences in the past, and the specific  differences can be observed by comparing the average differences.  Among them, the new generation entrepreneurs with two or  more entrepreneurial experiences have the highest psychological  capital, followed by entrepreneurs with one entrepreneurial  experience, and the worst is 0. Clearly, the experiences of more  entrepreneurs in the new generation of entrepreneurs enrich their  experiences. Make the psychological capital reach a higher level.After verifying the reliability and validity of the scale,  this paper adopts Pearson correlation analysis, using four  dimensions of psychological capital, three dimensions of  social capital, and two dimensions of entrepreneurial  performance. Firstly, the relationship between two dimensions  is investigated, and the correlation between variables is  analyzed. Table  2  lists the analysis results by using SPSS  23.0 statistical software. Pearson coefficient ranges from −1 to 1. The sign of numerical  value reflects the direction of correlation between variables,  and the absolute value of numerical value reflects the degree  of correlation between variables. The closer the absolute value  is to 1, the higher the degree of correlation between variables.  As Table  1 , whether as a whole or subdivided into dimensions, self-confidenc eh ope toughness optimisti c0123456numerical valu e dimension Number of items  Dime nsion alpha coefficien t Structural dimension Relationship dimension Cognitive dimension Survival performance Growth
t Structural dimension Relationship dimension Cognitive dimension Survival performance Growth performance1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0numerical valu e dime nsion Number of item s  Dime nsion alpha coefficien t Cultural perception Incentive perception Support perception Market network awareness Non-market network perception0.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0numerical valu e dimension Number of items  Dim ension alpha coefficien tA CB FIGURE 7 |  Reliability analysis results of the scale (A) shows the reliability analysis results of psychological capital scale, (B) shows the reliability analysis results of  social capital and entrepreneurial performance scale, and (C) shows the reliability analysis results of entrepreneurial environment perception scale.
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  12 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682psychological capital and entrepreneurial performance, social  capital, and entrepreneurial performance are all significantly  positively correlated, and the correlation coefficients are all  between 0.3 and 0.9, which are highly positively correlated. The above research shows that gender differences have a  significant impact on the psychological capital of the new  generation of entrepreneurs. In contemporary society, although  both males and females play a very significant role, actually,  entrepreneurs of different genders have different psychological  states in the process of starting a business and the psychological  capital they have to promote their own growth and performance  improvement. Male Entrepreneurs have higher psychological  capital, because compared with males, females are more  psychologically sensitive, more flustered when encountering AFI GFIN FI CFIR MSEA RMR0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0Fitting index Model Psychological capital  Social capital  Entrepreneurial perform ance  Entrepreneurial environm ent perceptio n FIGURE 8 |  Validity analysis results of the scale (AFI is the absolute fitting  index; GFI, NFI, CFI, RMSEA, and RMR are the goodness-of-fit evaluation  indexes of AMOS software). Psychological capital Social capital Entrepreneurial performance0123456Numerical valu e variabl e Male mean  Fem ale mean  F value  Sig.  T value  Sig. Double tail FIGURE 9 |  Independent sample T-test results.TABLE 2 |  Results of Pearson analysis of relations. Variable PC Confidence Hope Toughness Optimism SC S1 R C1 E S G PC 1 confidence 0.795 ** 1 hope 0.892 ** 0.630 ** 1 toughness 0.898 ** 0.594 ** 0.746 ** 1 optimism 0.86** 0.523 ** 0.689 ** 0.748 ** 1 SC 0.591 ** 0.471 ** 0.534 ** 0.470 ** 0.566 ** 1 S1 0.442 ** 0.344 ** 0.417 ** 0.363 ** 0.399 ** 0.810 ** 1 R 0.565 ** 0.469 ** 0.488 ** 0.444 ** 0.550 ** 0.847
0.344 ** 0.417 ** 0.363 ** 0.399 ** 0.810 ** 1 R 0.565 ** 0.469 ** 0.488 ** 0.444 ** 0.550 ** 0.847 ** 0.506 ** 1 C1 0.468 ** 0.362 ** 0.426 ** 0.365 ** 0.462 ** 0.839 ** 0.509 ** 0.601 ** 1 E 0.338 ** 0.301 ** 0.309 ** 0.307 ** 0.343 ** 0.407 ** 0.365 ** 0.309 ** 0.342 ** 1 S 0.388 ** 0.308 ** 0.330 ** 0.324 ** 0.379 ** 0.429 ** 0.330 ** 0.364 ** 0.377 ** 0.844 ** 1 G 0.376 ** 0.382 ** 0.386 ** 0.327 ** 0.394 ** 0.352 ** 0.382 ** 0.352 ** 0.395 ** 0.834 ** 0.408 ** 1 ***p < 0.001; **p < 0.01; and *p < 0.5. In the table, PC represents Psychological capital, SC represents Social capital, S1 represents Structural dimension, and R represents Relationship dimension. C1 stands for cognitive dimension, E for entrepreneurial performance, S for  Survival performance, and G for Growth performance.
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  13 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682problems, and have poorer psychological quality. The age  difference has a significant impact on the psychological capital  and entrepreneurial performance of the new generation  of entrepreneurs. Among them, the new generation of entrepreneurs between  the ages of 31 and 35 have the best psychological capital,  followed by 26–30 years old, and then 21–25 years old, the worst is 20 years old and below. This distribution is logical.  Obviously, the older the new generation of entrepreneurs,  the more mature their psychological capital is compared with  the younger generation. The new generation of entrepreneurs  between the ages of 26 and 30 have the best entrepreneurial  performance, followed by 31–35 years old, 21–25 years old  again, and the worst 20 year old and below. Compared with A1 B1 C1 A2 B2 C2 A3 B3 C3 A4 B4 C4-0.4-0.20.00.20.4Numerical valu e Age difference  AB  Mean difference  Standard error  Significance A1 B1 C1 A2 B2 C2 A3 B3 C3 A4 B4 C4-4-3-2-101Numerical valu e Age difference Mean differenc e  Standard error  Significance FIGURE 10 |  Multiple comparison results of psychological capital and entrepreneurial performance under different ages (A) shows the comparison results of  psychological capital under different ages; (B) shows the comparison results of entrepreneurial performance under different ages, in which A1, B1, and C1 represent  20 years old and below, A2, B2, and C2 represent 21–25 years old, A3, B3, and C3 represent 26–30 years old, and A4, B4, and C4 represent 31–35 years old. D1 E1 F1 D2 E2 F2 D3 E3 F3 D4 E4 F4-0.20.00.20.40.60.8Numerical valu e Educational differences Mean difference  Standard error  Significance FIGURE 11 |  Multiple comparison results of psychological capital under  educational differences (D1, E1, and F1 are high school and below, D2, E2,  and F2 are college degrees,
differences (D1, E1, and F1 are high school and below, D2, E2,  and F2 are college degrees, D3, E3, and F3 are undergraduate degrees, and  D4, E4, and F4 are master’s and above).W1X1Y1Z1W2X2Y2Z2W3X3Y3Z3W4X4Y4Z4W5X5Y5Z5-0.4-0.20.00.20.40.60.8Numerical valu e Educational differences Mean differenc e  Standard error  Significance FIGURE 12 |  Multiple comparison results of psychological capital of new  generation entrepreneurs with different enterprise establishment times (In  Figure, W1, X1, Y1, and Z1 are within 1 year of enterprise establishment, W2,  X2, Y2, and Z2 are 1–3 years of enterprise establishment, W3, X3, Y3, and Z3  are 3–5 years of enterprise establishment, and W4, X4, Y4, and Z4 are  5–10 years of enterprise establishment, W5).
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  14 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682the 31–35-year-old group, they are more motivated and  energetic, and they are more stable than the younger age  group, and their entrepreneurial performance is naturally  higher. Educational differences also have a significant impact  on the psychological capital of the new generation of  entrepreneurs. The correlation of variables between pairs  indicates that the proposed theoretical hypothesis H1 is  established, that is, the psychological capital of employees  has a significant positive impact on their entrepreneurial  performance. The four dimensions of psychological capital,  self-confidence, hope, resilience, and optimism have certain  influences on the two dimensions of entrepreneurial  performance, survival, and growth performance, respectively.  The results show that the four dimensions have a significant  positive impact on the two dimensions of entrepreneurial  performance, that is, the improvement of any psychological  capital dimension will lead to a significant increase in  entrepreneurial performance of the new generation of  entrepreneurs. Hypotheses H1a, H1b, H1c, H1d, H1e, H1f,  H1g, and H1h are all established. The test results show that  the proposed theoretical hypothesis H2 holds, that is, employees’  social capital has a significant positive impact on entrepreneurial  performance. It examines the influence of the three dimensions  of social capital: the structural dimension, the cognitive  dimension, and the relational dimension on the two dimensions  of entrepreneurial performance, survival, and growth  performance, respectively. The results show that all three  dimensions have a significant positive impact on the two  dimensions of entrepreneurial performance, that is, the  improvement of any social capital dimension will lead to a  significant increase in the entrepreneurial performance of
social capital dimension will lead to a  significant increase in the entrepreneurial performance of the  new generation of entrepreneurs. Hypotheses H2a, H2b, H2c, H2d, H2e, and H2f are established. Meanwhile, the influence  of various dimensions of social capital on entrepreneurial  performance is greater than that of psychological capital. The  theoretical hypothesis H3 is partially established, that is,  perception of the entrepreneurial environment plays a partial  moderating role in the relationship between psychological  capital and entrepreneurial performance. Among them, the  perception of the entrepreneurial environment has no significant  moderating effect on the relationship between psychological  capital confidence dimension and survival performance, the  relationship between hope dimension and survival performance,  resilience dimension and survival performance, optimism  dimension, and survival performance. Hypotheses H3a, H3b,  H3c, and H3d are not established. The perception of the  entrepreneurial environment plays a positive and significant  moderating effect on the relationship between the psychological  capital self-confidence dimension and the growth performance,  the hope dimension and the growth performance, the resilience  dimension and the growth performance, and the optimism  dimension and the growth performance. The better the  perception of the entrepreneurial environment, the stronger  the effect. Hypotheses H3e, H3f, H3g, and H3h are established.  The theoretical hypothesis H4 is partially established, that  is, the perception of the entrepreneurial environment plays  a partial moderating role in the relationship between social  capital and entrepreneurial performance. Among them, the  perception of the entrepreneurial environment plays a significant  negative moderating role between the social capital structure  dimension and survival performance, and the relationship  between the relationship dimension and survival performance.  The
and the relationship  between the relationship dimension and survival performance.  The better the perception of the entrepreneurial environment,  the weaker the effect. Hypotheses H4a and H4b are established.  However, the perception of the entrepreneurial environment  does not have a significant moderating effect on the relationship  between the social capital cognitive dimension and survival  performance, and hypothesis H4c is established. The perception  of the entrepreneurial environment does not have a significant  moderating effect on the relationship between social capital  structure dimension and growth performance, relationship  dimension and growth performance, and hypotheses H4d and  H4e are not established. While the perception of the  entrepreneurial environment has a significant negative  moderating effect on the relationship between social capital  cognition and growth performance, and the better the  entrepreneurial environment perception, the weaker the effect,  hypothesis H4f is established. CONCLUSION The psychological and social capital of the new generation  entrepreneurs are analyzed primarily, entrepreneurial  performance is selected as the evaluation result, and  entrepreneurial environment is regarded as external adjustment  variable. Attention is focused on the demographic data of  entrepreneurial variables and factors that can affect the  psychological, social, and entrepreneurial performance of M1 N1 M2 N2 M3 N3-2.5-2.0-1.5-1.0-0.50.00.5Numerical valu e Educational differences Mean difference  Standard error  Significance FIGURE 13 |  Multiple comparison of entrepreneurs’ entrepreneurial times (in  the figure, M1 and N1 represent zero entrepreneurial times, M2 and N2  represent 1–2 entrepreneurial times, and M3 and N3 represent 2 or more  entrepreneurial times).
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  15 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682the new generation entrepreneurs, which are control variables.  Through qualitative and quantitative analysis, study is  conducted on the influence of psychological capital and  social capital of new generation entrepreneurs on  entrepreneurial performance. The results show that factors,  such as gender, age, educational background, marital status,  and the time of establishment of enterprises, have a significant  impact on the psychological capital of the new generation  of entrepreneurs. Among them, the new generation  entrepreneurs aged 31–35 have the best psychological   capital, followed by 26–30, 21–25, and the worst is 20   and below. The correlation coefficient between psychology  and entrepreneurial performance, social capital, and entrepre- neurial performance is between 0.3 and 0.9, showing a  significant positive correlation. Hypothetical research shows  that the psychological capital of employees has a significant  positive impact on entrepreneurial performance. The social  capital of employees has a significant positive impact on  entrepreneurial performance. The perception of the  entrepreneurial environment plays a partial moderating role  between psychological capital and entreprene urial  performance, and it also plays a partial moderating role  between social capital and entrepreneurial performance. Although certain results have been achieved, there are  still many shortcomings in the research process, which are  summarized as follows. Firstly, in the aspect of variable  measurement, all the data of the survey come from the  same theme, and all the elements of the survey are conducted  in the form of entrepreneurs’ relatively subjective self- assessment, which has certain limitations. Secondly, in the  aspect of sample collection, by combining online and offline  forms, good results have been
in the  aspect of sample collection, by combining online and offline  forms, good results have been achieved. Quantitative support  has collected a sufficient number of surveys, but the sample  distribution range is too concentrated, and there is room  for further optimization. Thirdly, entrepreneurship is a  dynamic process. Investigation is only concentrated on the  influence of psychological and social capital on entrepreneurial  performance in the same period. Unable to consider the  relationship between entrepreneurship and time, so the results  are not accurate enough. In the future research, the above  points will be  given more attention to make the research  results more valuable and convincing.DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT The original contributions presented in the study are included  in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can  be  directed to the corresponding author. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS All authors listed have made a substantial, direct, and intellectual  contribution to the work and approved it for publication. FUNDING Education Programme foundation, Education bureau of Ningbo  city 202021YGH039. Education Programme Foundation.  Project on the Integration of Industry cooperation   HX2019129. Project on the Integration of Industry cooperation   HX2020162. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 202021YGH039 Research on the construction of industrial  College of applied undergraduate colleges under the background  of industry-education integration, Education planning topic of  Ningbo, Education Programme foundation, and Education  bureau of Ningbo city. GH2022348 Research on the construction system of Industrial  College of Applied Undergraduate University based on the strategic  idea of integrating industry and education to serve local development,  Education planning topic of Zhejiang Province, and Education  Programme Foundation, Higher Education of Zhejiang   Province. HX2019129 Key technology and application research of  computer room monitoring and
Province. HX2019129 Key technology and application research of  computer room monitoring and management system based on  virtual reality, industry-university-research cooperation project,  Project on the Integration of Industry cooperation. HX2020162 ehafo AI algorithm system development, industry- university-research cooperation project, Project on the Integration  of Industry cooperation.   REFERENCES Aagaard, A., Saari, U. A., and Mkinen, S. J. (2020). Mapping the types of  business experimentation in creating sustainable value: A case study of  cleantech start-ups. J. Clean. Prod.  279:123182. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.123182 Albright, J. (2019). Paranoid pilots Club A few techniques from a charter  member. Bus. Commer. Aviat.  115, 26–32. Alexander, R., and Fry, A. (2019). Strategic design and the future of work- and-weliness. Design Health  3, 135–154. doi: 10.1080/24735132.2019.1584024 Anglin, A. H., Short, J. C., Drover, W ., Stevenson, R. M., McKenny, A. F., and  Allison, T. H. (2018). The power of positivity? The influence of positive  psychological capital language on crowdfunding performance. J. Bus. Ventur.   33, 470–492. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusvent.2018.03.003 Arias, E., Barba-Sánchez, V ., Carrión, C., and Casado, R. (2018). Enhancing  entrepreneurship education in a Master's degree in computer engineering: A project-based learning approach. Admin. Sci.  8, 58–74. doi: 10.3390/ admsci8040058 Badakhshian, S., and Samiee, F. (2020). The effectiveness of a vocational  rehabilitation program on the psychological Capital in People with spinal  cord injury. Iranian J. Rehabil. Res. Nursing  7, 11–22. doi: 10.29252/ijrn.7.1.11 Balboni, B., Bortoluzzi, G., Pugliese, R., and Tracogna, A. (2019). Business  model evolution, contextual ambidexterity and the growth performance of  high-tech start-ups. J. Bus. Res.  99, 115–124. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.   02.029 Barba-Sánchez, V ., and Atienza-Sahuquillo, C. (2017). Entrepreneurial motivation  and
02.029 Barba-Sánchez, V ., and Atienza-Sahuquillo, C. (2017). Entrepreneurial motivation  and self-employment: evidence from expectancy theory. Int. Entrep. Manag.  J. 13, 1097–1115. doi: 10.1007/s11365-017-0441-z Barba-Sánchez, V ., Mitre, M., and Del Brío, J. (2022). The entrepreneurial  intention of university students: An environmental perspective. Eur. Res.  Manag. Bus. Econ.  28:100184. doi: 10.1016/j.iedeen.2021.100184
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  16 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682Chambers, D., Mclaughlin, P . A., and Stanley, L. (2019). Barriers to prosperity:  the harmful impact of entry regulations on income inequality. Public Choice   180, 165–190. doi: 10.1007/s11127-018-0498-4 Chen, M. Y ., Liu, J., Ma, H. Y ., and Zhang, Y . H. (2019). Research on the  impact of psychological capital and entrepreneurial opportunity identification  of the new generation of migrant workers on entrepreneurial performance.  J. Sichuan Univ. Arts Sci.  29, 103–110. Desai, A., and Dearmond, S. (2021). Differences in consulting experiences with  for-profit and non-profit clients: implications for practice and research. Int.  J. Manag. Educ.  19:100554. doi: 10.1016/j.ijme.2021.100554 Harms, P . D., Krasikova, D. V ., and Fred, L. (2018). Not me, But reflects me:  validating a simple implicit measure of psychological capital. J. Pers. Assess.   100, 551–562. doi: 10.1080/00223891.2018.1480489 Iazzolino, G., Greco, D., Verteramo, S., Attanasio, A. L., Carravetta, G., and  Granato, T. (2019). An integrated methodology for supporting the development  and the performance evaluation of academic spin-offs. Meas. Bus. Excell.   24, 69–89. doi: 10.1108/MBE-09-2019-0097 Kang, H. J., and Busser, J. A. (2018). Impact of service climate and psychological  capital on employee engagement: The role of organizational hierarchy. Int.  J. Hosp. Manag.  75, 1–9. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhm.2018.03.003 Lei, X. L. (2018). Research on the relationship between college Students'  entrepreneurs' psychological capital, entrepreneurial support and entrepreneurial  performance. J. Hei he  Univ.  9, 59–61. Li, J. (2018). Research on social capital and urban entrepreneurial performance  of migrant workers-Based on the data of 13 cities in the East. Lanzhou J.   03, 173–184. Linton, G. O., and Kask, J. (2017). Configurations of entrepreneurial
Lanzhou J.   03, 173–184. Linton, G. O., and Kask, J. (2017). Configurations of entrepreneurial orientation  and competitive strategy for high performance. J. Bus. Res.  70, 168–176.  doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.08.022 Lukes, M., Longo, M. C., and Zouhar, J. (2019). Do business incubators really  enhance entrepreneurial growth? Evidence from a large sample of innovative  Italian start-ups. Technovation  25, 82–83. doi: 10.1016/j.technovation.2018.07.008 Ma, H. Y ., and Wang, Z. D. (2018). Research on the impact of social capital  and psychological capital on migrant workers' entrepreneurial performance -  based on 889 household survey data in Shaanxi Province. J. Agri. Forest.  Eco. Manag.  17, 738–745. Mas, F. D., and Paoloni, P . (2019). A relational capital perspective on social  sustainability. The case of female entrepreneurship in Italy. Meas. Bus. Excell.   24, 114–130. doi: 10.1108/MBE-08-2019-0086 Miao, C., Qian, S., and Humphrey, R. H. (2019). The challenges of lean  management research and practice in the field of entrepreneurship: The  roles of I-O psychology theories and I-O psychologists. Ind. Organ. Psychol.   12, 260–263. doi: 10.1017/iop.2019.46 Miller, M. R., Alexander, R. J., Arbige, V . A., Dell, R. F., Kremer, S. R.,  McClune, B. P ., et al. (2019). Optimal allocation of students to naval  nuclear-power training units. Oper. Res.  59, 95–97. doi: 10.1287/ inte.2017.0905 Obschonka, M., Lee, N., Rodríguez-Pose, A., Eichstaedt, J. C., and Ebert, T.  (2020). Big data methods, social media, and the psychology of  entrepreneurial regions: capturing cross-county personality traits and  their impact on entrepreneurship in the USA. Small Bus. Econ.  55,  567–588. doi: 10.1007/s11187-019-00204-2 Osman, T., Thomas, T., Mondschein, A., and Taylor, B. D. (2019). Does traffic  congestion influence the location of new business establishments? An analysis  of the San Francisco Bay Area. Urban Stud.  56, 1026–1041. doi:  10.1177/0042098018784179Oukes, T.,
of the San Francisco Bay Area. Urban Stud.  56, 1026–1041. doi:  10.1177/0042098018784179Oukes, T., Raesfeld, A. V ., and Groen, A. (2019). Power in a startup’s relationships  with its established partners: interactions between structural and behavioural  power. Ind. Mark. Manag.  80, 68–83. doi: 10.1016/j.indmarman.2017.12.007 Pan, Y ., Huang, P ., and Gopal, A. (2019). Storm clouds on the horizon? New  entry threats and R&D Investments in the U.S. IT industry. Inf. Syst. Res.   30, 540–562. doi: 10.1287/isre.2018.0816 Qasim, A., and Jader, D. S. A. (2021). The relationship Between strategic  improvisation And entrepreneurial performance: analytical research In The  ministry Of agriculture. J. Contemp. Issues Bus. Gov.  27, 1030–1039. Salerno, J. A. (2019). Products & services previews. Bus. Commer. Aviat.  115,  70–71. Sherman, P . J. (2019). Questions to ask Before launching a continuous improvement  program. APICS  29, 14–15. Silva, D. S., Ghezzi, A., Aguiar, R., et al. (2020). Lean startup, agile methodologies  and customer development for business model innovation: A systematic  review and research agenda. Int. J. Entrep. Behav. Res.  26, 595–628. doi:  10.1108/IJEBR-07-2019-0425 Stefanis, P . D. (2020). Making projects and business in green chemistry: creating  a winning start-up, fund raising, and writing competitive research proposals.  Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal.  179, 511–524. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64337-7.00026-4 Tkacz, M. (2016). New generation of social entrepreneurs: exploratory research  and cross case study analysis of new generation of social enterprises. Ekonomia  Społeczna  2, 20–37. doi: 10.15678/ES.2016.2.02 Webber, D. J., Kitagawa, F., and Plumridge, A. (2020). Student entrepreneurial  propensities in the individual-organisational-environmental nexus. Eco. Issues   25, 31–59. Wu, T. J., and Wu, Y . J. (2019). Innovative work behaviors, employee engagement,  and surface acting: a delineation of supervisor-employee emotional contagion  effects.
engagement,  and surface acting: a delineation of supervisor-employee emotional contagion  effects. Manag. Decis.  57, 3200–3216. doi: 10.1108/MD-02-2018-0196 Y ang, X. L., and Wang, C. (2019). Resource acquisition and immigrant  entrepreneurial performance-based on the survey data of the Three Gorges  Reservoir Area Rural economy. J. Social Capital  02, 62–69. Zhao, B., and Xu, S. P . (2015). Research on the correlation between entrepreneurial  involvement, entrepreneurial environment perception and entrepreneurial  performance of the new generation of entrepreneurs. Jiangsu Bus.Theory   26, 70–74. Zhou, W ., Y ang, X., Li, Y ., and Zhang, Y . (2019). Pattern versus level: a new  look at the personality-entrepreneurship relationship. Int. J. Entrep. Behav.  Res. 25, 150–168. doi: 10.1108/IJEBR-03-2018-0176 Conflict of Interest:  The authors declare that the research was conducted in  the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be  construed  as a potential conflict of interest. Publisher’s Note:  All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the  authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations,  or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may  be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is  not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Copyright © 2022 Wang, Zhou and Wang. This is an open-access article distributed  under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY) . The use,  distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original  author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication  in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,  distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  1 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682ORIGINAL RESEARCH published: 09 May 2022 doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.832682 Edited by:  Jun Shen,   University of Wollongong, Australia Reviewed by:  Zubair Akram,   Zhejiang Gongshang University,  China Virginia Barba-Sánchez,   Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha,  Spain *Correspondence:  Lei Wang    122195466@163.com Specialty section:  This article was submitted to   Human-Media   Interaction,   a section of the journal   Frontiers in Psychology Received:  10 December 2021 Accepted:  31 January 2022 Published:  09 May 2022 Citation: Wang R, Zhou H and Wang L (2022)  The Influence of Psychological  Capital and Social Capital on the  Entrepreneurial Performance of the  New Generation of Entrepreneurs. Front. Psychol. 13:832682. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.832682The Influence of Psychological  Capital and Social Capital on the  Entrepreneurial Performance of the  New Generation of Entrepreneurs Ruoqi Wang 1, Haijun Zhou 2 and Lei Wang 1* 1 School of Information and Intelligent Engineering, Zhejiang Wanli University, Ningbo, China, 2 Zhejiang Security Vocational  and Technical College, Wenzhou, China To enable that the new generation of entrepreneurs can effectively use their own qualities  and abilities to improve the level of entrepreneurial performance, and to successfully pass  through the entrepreneurial period of the enterprise and achieve longer-term development,  the new generation of entrepreneurs is taken as the research object, and firstly, the  definition and interaction of psychological capital and entrepreneurial performance are  pointed out. Secondly, the questionnaires are designed with reference to the relevant  maturity scales, and the reliability, validity analysis, correlation analysis, and multiple linear  regression analysis of the collected effective questionnaires are carried out through SPSS  and AMOS software. Thirdly, on this basis, it verifies the influence of --- Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  15 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682the new generation entrepreneurs, which are control variables.  Through qualitative and quantitative analysis, study is  conducted on the influence of psychological capital and  social capital of new generation entrepreneurs on  entrepreneurial performance. The results show that factors,  such as gender, age, educational background, marital status,  and the time of establishment of enterprises, have a significant  impact on the psychological capital of the new generation  of entrepreneurs. Among them, the new generation  entrepreneurs aged 31–35 have the best psychological   capital, followed by 26–30, 21–25, and the worst is 20   and below. The correlation coefficient between psychology  and entrepreneurial performance, social capital, and entrepre- neurial performance is between 0.3 and 0.9, showing a  significant positive correlation. Hypothetical research shows  that the psychological capital of employees has a significant  positive impact on entrepreneurial performance. The social  capital of employees has a significant positive impact on  entrepreneurial performance. The perception of the  entrepreneurial environment plays a partial moderating role  between psychological capital and entreprene urial  performance, and it also plays a partial moderating role  between social capital and entrepreneurial performance. Although certain results have been achieved, there are  still many shortcomings in the research process, which are  summarized as follows. Firstly, in the aspect of variable  measurement, all the data of the survey come from the  same theme, and all the elements of the survey are conducted  in the form of entrepreneurs’ relatively subjective self- assessment, which has certain limitations. Secondly, in the  aspect of sample collection, by combining online and offline  forms, good results have been
carried out through SPSS  and AMOS software. Thirdly, on this basis, it verifies the influence of psychological capital  of the new generation entrepreneurs on entrepreneurial performance and the moderating  effect of entrepreneurial environment perception. The results show that there is a significant  positive correlation between the dimensions of psychological capital and entrepreneurial  performance. Gender, age, educational background, marital status, the establishment  time of enterprises, and the number of employees all have a significant impact on the  psychological capital of the new generation of entrepreneurs. Among them, the  psychological capital of the new generation of entrepreneurs aged 31–35 is the best,  followed by aged 26–30, 21–25, and the worst is 20 years old and below, which is logical.  The correlation coefficient between psychological capital and entrepreneurial performance,  social capital and entrepreneurial performance shows a significant positive correlation.  The research on the relationship between psychological capital, social capital, and  entrepreneurial performance of new generation entrepreneurs systematically explains why  some enterprises created by the new generation of entrepreneurs can achieve rapid  growth and deepen the research in related fields. Keywords: psychological capital, social capital, entrepreneurial performance, new generation of entrepreneurs,  deep learning
Frontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  2 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New Generation INTRODUCTION The rapid development of science and technology has promoted  the prosperity of the economy and the development of  different industries. A large number of entrepreneurs have  emerged from all walks of life. Taking “science and technology  leading economical development” as a spirit, social  entrepreneurs have greatly promoted the further development  of the economy of a region and the whole country to create  more updated employment opportunities. Nowadays,  entrepreneurial economy has become the main engine of  global economic growth ( Miao et  al., 2019 ; Stefanis, 2020 ).  With the increasing demand for entrepreneurship,  entrepreneurial activities are continuously emerging in society.  Therefore, research on entrepreneurship research has become  a very active research field in universities globally, covering  academic fields, such as economics, sociology, business  administration, and science ( Balboni et al., 2019 ; Silva et al.,  2020 ). Researchers in every field have their unique research  perspectives and have made great achievements in  studying entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship can promote sustainable economic growth  and play a significant important role in economic development.  In the current research, the research on entrepreneurship has  shifted from the trait theory to the cognitive perspective ( Oukes  et  al., 2019 ). Scholars have been searching for the factors that  affect entrepreneurs’ entrepreneurial ability and success. Different  people choose different research directions from which they  get their different answers. However, many studies have pointed  out that improving a company’s psychological capital is actually  very important to the success of entrepreneurship ( Lukes et al.,  2019 ). Numerous studies have shown that improving the  psychological capital of entrepreneurs is
2019 ). Numerous studies have shown that improving the  psychological capital of entrepreneurs is indeed of great  significance to successful entrepreneurship ( Osman et al., 2019 ;  Salerno, 2019 ). Psychological capital first appeared in the research  in 1997, after that, some scholars analyzed economic capital,  human capital, and social capital in entrepreneurship research,  emphasized people’s positive psychological strength from the  aspects of positive psychological behavior and positive  organization, and put forward the concept of “positive  psychological capital” ( Iazzolino et  al., 2019 ). Experts and  scholars are constantly studying and deepening this concept.  Psychological theory has gradually become an important research  topic in the field of active organizational behavior. To sum up, although the important influence of psychological  capital of entrepreneurs on entrepreneurial performance in the  entrepreneurial context is undeniable, the impact mechanism  of psychological capital of entrepreneurs on entrepreneurial  performance is still unknown. Therefore, the main research  purpose is to construct a theoretical model based on the  analysis of the psychological capital, social capital, and  entrepreneurial performance of the new generation of  entrepreneurs, and to effectively measure the psychological  capital, social capital, and entrepreneurial performance of the  new generation of entrepreneurs. From both direct and indirect  perspectives, the influence of psychological capital and social  capital on the entrepreneurial performance level of the new generation of entrepreneurs is analyzed, and then, relevant  countermeasures and suggestions are proposed. LITERATURE REVIEW Every new technological revolution will bring a new wave of  entrepreneurship. Those founders and partners who can seize  favorable opportunities and strive to obtain economic value  can be  regarded as entrepreneurs. Throughout the domestic  and foreign literature on the --- capital, human capital, and social  capital. As the name implies, economic capital refers to tangible  assets, such as capital and property, owned by people. Human  capital refers to the total value of labor (including physical  labor and mental labor) attached to human body’s physical  strength and intelligence ( Chambers et al., 2019 ; Aagaard et al.,  2020 ). Social capital refers to the association between individuals  or groups-social network, reciprocal norms, and the resulting  trust. It is the sum of resources brought by people’s position  in the social structure. In the existing research, there are many literatures that focus  on the influence of economic capital, human capital, and social  capital on work and entrepreneurship. However, more and  more managers and scholars realize that with the rapid  development of global economy, the competition among  enterprises is also intensifying. In the past, only through the  traditional human capital and social capital for investment and  development, it is not enough to maintain the strong competition  of enterprises ( Alexander and Fry, 2019 ; Webber et  al., 2020 ).  Therefore, there are more and more studies on positive  psychological resources, and many empirical research results  have been obtained. Figure 1  shows the four capitals recognized  by academia to enhance the competitive advantages of individuals  and organizations.The structure and meaning of psychological capital strengthen  and supplement each other, namely, they play a complementary  role ( Badakhshian and Samiee, 2020 ). On one hand, strengthening  the scientific connotation of psychological capital can play an  auxiliary role in improving the structure of psychological capital;  on the other hand, supplementing and optimizing the structure  of psychological capital can play a feedback role in understanding  the connotation of psychological capital, thereby developing  more tools for measuring psychological capital. At present, there is no
value  can be  regarded as entrepreneurs. Throughout the domestic  and foreign literature on the definition of the concept of the  new generation of entrepreneurs, there is no authoritative and  unified definition. It is well known that the new generation  is divided based on sociology and demography. At present,  the most common definition of “new generation of employees”  is the employees born in the 1980s and 1990s, indicating that  age boundaries are the most common basis for dividing this  new generation group. Nowadays, foreign scholars Tkacz (2016)   defined entrepreneurs aged 35 and below as the new generation  of social entrepreneurs, while domestic scholars Zhao and Xu  (2015)  defined the new generation of entrepreneurs as  entrepreneurs born after 1985, indicating that the “post-85 s”  may indeed be  an age boundary for the new generation of  entrepreneurs. Lei (2018)  concluded that the psychological  capital of entrepreneurs has a greater impact on entrepreneurial  performance through the study of the relationship between  the university’s psychological capital of entrepreneurs and its  entrepreneurial performance. Chen et  al. (2019)  proposed that  psychological capital is an important psychological resource,  and using 446 new generations of migrant workers as a research  sample, the structural equation model was used to analyze  the relationship between psychological capital of new generation  of migrant workers and their entrepreneurial performance level  had a significant positive effect. By reviewing relevant studies,  it showed that psychological capital mainly plays a positive  role in entrepreneurial performance. Li (2018)  analyzed the  entrepreneurial data of migrant workers in 13 cities in eastern  China and found that China should build a social capital  generation and accumulation mechanism for migrant workers  in relevant cities as soon as possible, to promote the improvement  of the urban entrepreneurial performance of migrant
soon as possible, to promote the improvement  of the urban entrepreneurial performance of migrant workers.  Y ang and Wang (2019)  used the survey data related to the  entrepreneurship of immigrants in the Three Georges Reservoir  and concluded that social capital significantly promoted the  improvement of the entrepreneurial performance of immigrants.  Ma and Wang (2018)  used the dual perspectives of social  capital and psychological capital to propose the influence of  social capital and psychological capital on the entrepreneurial  performance of migrant workers. The results showed that social  capital and psychological capital are positively correlated with  the entrepreneurial performance level of migrant workers.  Barba-Sánchez and Atienza-Sahuquillo (2017)  implemented a  theoretical model based on expectation theory to explain the  motivation and ability of individual entrepreneurs. The results  indicated that expectations, tools, and value of expectations  could enhance entrepreneurial motivation. From the review  of relevant studies, they showed that there were relatively few --- Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  3 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682studies on the influence of psychological capital and social  capital on entrepreneurial performance. Social capital is a  productive resource that can promote cooperation among the  new generation of entrepreneurs. Good psychological capital  can help to improve the social skills of entrepreneurs, and it  is also of great help for entrepreneurs to improve their  entrepreneurial performance. And scholars generally believe  that the social capital of entrepreneurs significantly promotes  the improvement of their entrepreneurial performance. However,  there is no consensus on how the various dimensions of more  specific social capital affect the various dimensions of  entrepreneurial performance, and scholars need to conduct  more in-depth research in the future. RELEVANT THEORIES AND METHODS The Concept of Psychological Capital Many studies have proved that psychological factors will affect  enterprise performance. Wu and Wu (2019)  pointed out in  the research that the results showed that the positive emotions  of employees play an intermediary role in the positive role of  supervisors in expressing the positive emotions of employees’  work engagement; work engagement will promote the positive  influence of employees’ positive emotions on their innovative  behavior. Employees’ negative emotions will promote the influence  of supervisors’ negative emotions on employees’ superficial  behavior and innovative behavior. Introduction is made to the  concept of psychological capital, and discussion is focused on  the influence of psychological capital in the process of starting  a business ( Albright, 2019 ; Mas and Paoloni, 2019 ). According  to different forms of development, capital can be  divided into  three types, namely, economic capital, human capital, and social  capital. As the name implies, economic capital refers to
thereby developing  more tools for measuring psychological capital. At present, there is no unified conclusion about the  composition of psychological capital, but in theory, the definition  of psychological capital mainly involves four aspects, namely,  self-efficacy, optimism, hope, and resilience ( Anglin et al., 2018 ;  Sherman, 2019 ). The development and definition of psychological  capital theory focuses on three main aspects: trait theory, state  theory, and integration theory. Concepts Related to Entrepreneurial  Performance In many current studies, there is no clear definition of  entrepreneurial performance. But through summarizing previous  studies, it can be  found that entrepreneurial performance is  usually evaluated and measured by the impact of new enterprises.  Different researchers have given different definitions of  entrepreneurial performance ( Harms et al., 2018 ). Some researchers  believe that the study of entrepreneurial performance must  consider the social and internal environment closely related to  entrepreneurial success. Some researchers believe that  entrepreneurial achievements are various and are the result of  an organization reaching a certain degree. Entrepreneurial  performance is systematic. Only by starting from three aspects:  entrepreneurship, entrepreneurial team, and entrepreneurial  environment can scholars find suitable indicators. When  entrepreneurs participate in entrepreneurial activities, they will  show a lot of entrepreneurial behavior. These entrepreneurial  behaviors should be  regularly monitored and evaluated, because  only the correct entrepreneurial behavior can produce good  results ( Kang and Busser, 2018 ; Obschonka et al., 2020 ). Generally  speaking, entrepreneurial performance is a collection of the total  achievements and results achieved by entrepreneurial organizations  (Linton and Kask, 2017 ; Pan et  al., 2019 ). Entrepreneurial  performance of a new generation of entrepreneurs is a general
et  al., 2019 ). Entrepreneurial  performance of a new generation of entrepreneurs is a general  term for the achievements and efficiency that new enterprises  can achieve in the entrepreneurial process, and is one of the  most important indicators of entrepreneurial theory ( Miller et al.,  2019 ; Desai and Dearmond, 2021 ). There are three common  indicators for monitoring entrepreneurial performance, which  are financial indicators, performance indicators, and objective  indicators. Financial indicators are an intuitive way to measure  performance, and data are easy to obtain. Sales growth, return  on investment, return on assets, price, and other effective  information can be  obtained through the company’s financial  statements. However, when data are applied to specific research,  it will be  adjusted according to actual needs. Performance indicators are factors used to determine the  performance of entity objects. It is an important part of --- Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  4 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682performance appraisal task, which is reflected in behavior index  and result index. Behavioral indicators refer to employees’  behavior in the workplace, while performance indicators refer  to specific changes in work and organization due to workers’  work ( Qasim and Jader, 2021 ). Key performance indicators,  also known as key performance indicators (KPIs), are an  objective quantitative management indicator, which measures  process performance by defining, sampling, calculating, and  analyzing key parameters of internal process input and output. Application of Psychological Capital  Theory As the promoter and main participant of entrepreneurial  activities, entrepreneurs have great influence on entrepreneurial  performance. The research on entrepreneur personality paradigm  is widespread in related fields, but there are few consistent  conclusions ( Arias et al., 2018 ; Zhou et al., 2019 ). It is difficult  to describe entrepreneurship in the general sense with stable  personal characteristics. Therefore, many researchers transform  these personal characteristics. Self-efficacy, the ability to seize  the opportunity, cognitive motivation, and other concepts are  used to describe the characteristics of a people. Psychological  capital, economic capital, human capital, and social capital are  the factors that jointly promote the success of enterprises, while  psychological capital controls the extended capital model that  provides competitive advantage. Someone can achieve greater  success as an entrepreneur by better adjusting economic, human,  and social capital. Entrepreneurial performance is the general  name of entrepreneurial organization performance. Researchers  still face many challenges in measuring entrepreneurial  performance. It is difficult to obtain objective and reliable  entrepreneurial performance
performance. It is difficult to obtain objective and reliable  entrepreneurial performance data, and it is difficult to compare  and analyze several research results in detail. However, the  social capital of the new generation of entrepreneurs is generally  recognized in significantly improving enterprise performance,  so social capital has become an important predictor of enterprise  performance. While, there is no consensus on how different aspects of social capital will affect entrepreneurial performance.  As the selected intermediate variables or adjustment variables  are limited. Therefore, further analysis and research should  be  carried out on related intermediate variables or regulatory  variables ( Barba-Sánchez et  al., 2022 ). Theoretical Models and Assumptions Based on the theory of psychological and social capital, a  theoretical research model of psychological and social capital  mechanism for entrepreneurial performance of new generation  entrepreneurs is constructed from three aspects: research level,  path, and main factors. The research level has two parts:  psychological capital and social capital. The research path is  the main influence of psychological and social capital on  entrepreneurial performance. The perception of entrepreneurial  environment lies in the slow release of psychological and social  capital’s influence on corporate performance. The main factors  include psychological capital and social capital. Figure 2  displays  the theoretical model. The variables contained in the model are as: Independent variable: psychological capital: self-confidence,  hope, tenacity, and optimism. Social capital: structure,  relationship, and perception. Alternative variables: entrepreneurial awareness,  entrepreneurial culture awareness, entrepreneurial incentive  awareness, entrepreneurial support awareness, etc. Knowledge: market network knowledge and non-market  network knowledge. Dependent variables: Entrepreneurial performance has two
and non-market  network knowledge. Dependent variables: Entrepreneurial performance has two  aspects: survival performance and growth performance. Control variables: including gender, age, education level,  marital status, previous entrepreneurial experience, industry,  establishment time, and number of employees. Research Hypothesis The theory of psychological capital emphasizes a positive  psychological force of individuals. The concept of psychological  Economic  capitalHuman capital Social capitalPsychological   capita l What do you  haveWhat do you  knowWho do you  knowWho are you Funds and  tangible assetsExperience Skill  Knowledge  ConceptRelationship  work network  friendSelf-confidence  hope optimistic   and self-willed FIGURE 1 |  Four major capital forms.
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  5 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682capital is derived from positive organizational behavior. Positive  organizational behavior is the study and application of human  resource advantages and mental abilities that are positively oriented,  measurable, developable, and effectively manageable to improve  workplace performance. Positive psychological states, such as  self-confidence, hope, resilience, and optimism, have become the  main research objects of positive organizational behavior because  they meet their standards. Therefore, academics generally agree  that psychological capital is mainly composed of four dimensions:  self-confidence, hope, resilience, and optimism. On the basis of  this, studying and applying the psychological capital advantages  and abilities of the new generation of entrepreneurs can also  improve their entrepreneurial performance. Among them, self- confidence refers to the belief that oneself adjusts cognitive  patterns and takes actions to accomplish work goals. Confidence,  hope, resilience, and optimism in the psychological capital of  entrepreneurs can significantly promote the development of various  entrepreneurial activities. Psychological capital helps to improve  entrepreneurs’ social ability and communication skills, which is  also of great help for entrepreneurs to improve their entrepreneurial  performance. Based on the above theoretical analysis, it is inferred  that entrepreneurs with positive psychological capital have  significant psychological advantages in determining entrepreneurial  goals, exploring entrepreneurial opportunities, overcoming various  entrepreneurial difficulties, stimulating the entrepreneurial potential  of the organization, etc. This psychological advantage will promote  entrepreneurs to carry out various entrepreneurial activities,  thereby enhancing their entrepreneurial
to carry out various entrepreneurial activities,  thereby enhancing their entrepreneurial performance.Therefore, it is hypothesized as: H1: Psychological capital has a significant positive effect  on entrepreneurial performance. H1a:  Confidence has a significant positive effect on  survival performance. H1b:  Hope has a significant positive effect on  survival performance. H1c:  Resilience has a significant positive effect on  survival performance. H1d:  Optimism has a significant positive effect on  survival performance. H1e:  Confidence has a significant positive effect on  growth performance. H1f:  Hope has a significant positive effect on  growth performance. ToughPsychol ogical  capital Social capi talEntrepreneurial  environment perception Entrepreneurial  performancehope confidence optimism Structural  dimension Relationship  dimensionCognit ive  dimensionSurvival  performance Performance gr owth FIGURE 2 |  Research model of psychological capital, social capital, and entrepreneurial performance.
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  6 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682H1g:  Resilience has a significant positive effect on  growth performance. H1h:  Optimism has a significant positive effect on  growth performance positive influence. Social capital helps the new generation of entrepreneurs to  obtain the resources and information needed for entrepreneurship,  helps to promote the success of entrepreneurship, and then  improves their entrepreneurial performance. Therefore, it is hypothesized as: H2: Social capital has a significant positive impact on  entrepreneurial performance. H2a:  Structural dimension has a significant positive  impact on survival performance. H2b:  Relationship dimension has a significant positive  impact on survival performance. H2c:  Cognitive dimension has a significant positive  impact on survival performance. H2d:  Structural dimension has a significant positive  impact on growth performance. H2e:  Relationship dimension has a significant positive  impact on growth performance. H2f:  Cognitive dimension has a significant positive  impact on growth performance. Entrepreneurs perceive different entrepreneurial environments,  and psychological capital has different effects on their  entrepreneurial performance. In a good entrepreneurial  environment, the role of social capital will decrease for  entrepreneurs, while the impact of psychological capital on  entrepreneurial performance will increase. This is because a  good entrepreneurial environment is conducive to the  accumulation of psychological capital. On a good material basis,  the role of a positive psychological state is particularly obvious.  The better the psychological capital, the higher the level of  entrepreneurial performance. On the contrary, in a poor  entrepreneurial environment, the urgent need for entrepreneurial  capital of basic material will greatly enhance the role of social  capital.
for entrepreneurial  capital of basic material will greatly enhance the role of social  capital. Meanwhile, the entrepreneurial environment is not  conducive to the accumulation of psychological capital and  may even reduce psychological capital, and the significance of  psychological capital is also greatly weakened.Therefore, it is hypothesized as: H3: Perception of the entrepreneurial environment plays  a moderating role between psychological capital and  entrepreneurial performance. The better the perception  of the entrepreneurial environment, the stronger the  relationship between psychological capital and  entrepreneurial performance. H3a:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between self-confidence and  survival performance, and the better the perception of  the entrepreneurial environment, the stronger  the effect. H3b:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between hope and survival  performance. The better the perception of the  entrepreneurial environment, the stronger the effect. H3c:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between resilience and survival  performance, and the better the perception of the  entrepreneurial environment, the stronger the effect. H3d:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between optimism and survival  performance. The better the perception of the  entrepreneurial environment, the stronger the effect. H3e:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between self-confidence and  growth performance. The better the perception of the  entrepreneurial environment, the stronger the effect. H3f:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between hope and growth  performance. The better the perception of the  entrepreneurial environment, the stronger the effect. H3g:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role --- stronger the effect. H3g:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between resilience and growth  performance, and the better the perception of the  entrepreneurial environment, the stronger the effect. H3h:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between optimism and growth  performance. The better the perception of the  entrepreneurial environment, the stronger the effect. --- Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  7 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682The entrepreneurial environment perceived by  entrepreneurs is different, and the degree of influence of  social capital on their entrepreneurial performance will also  be  different. When perceiving a relatively complete  entrepreneurial environment, such as policies, finance,  commerce, hardware facilities, services, and culture,  entrepreneurs can usually obtain the basic material and  capital required for starting a business relatively easily;  simultaneously, the dependence on social capital will be less.  Conversely, in a poor perception of the entrepreneurial  environment, entrepreneurs often have to strengthen social  capital to better obtain the basic material and capital required  for their own business, and their dependence on social  capital will be  greater. Therefore, favorable perception of  the entrepreneurial environment plays a negative moderating  role in the impact of social capital on entrepreneurial   performance. Therefore, it is hypothesized as: H4: Perception of the entrepreneurial environment plays  a moderating role between social capital and  entrepreneurial performance. The better the perception  of the entrepreneurial environment, the weaker the  relationship between social capital and  entrepreneurial performance. H4a:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between the structural  dimension and survival performance. The better the  perception of the entrepreneurial environment, the  weaker the effect. H4b:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between relational dimension  and survival performance, the better the perception of  the entrepreneurial environment, the weaker the effect. H4c:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between cognitive dimension  and survival performance. The better
plays a moderating role between cognitive dimension  and survival performance. The better the perception of  the entrepreneurial environment, the weaker the effect. H4d:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between the structural  dimension and growth performance. The better the  perception of the entrepreneurial environment, the  weaker the effect. H4e:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between relationship dimension  and growth performance, the better the perception of  the entrepreneurial environment, the weaker the effect.H4f:  Perception of the entrepreneurial environment  plays a moderating role between cognitive dimension  and growth performance. The better the perception of  the entrepreneurial environment, the weaker the effect. Through comparison, it shows that in different entrepreneurial  environments, psychological capital and social capital have  different degrees of vital influence on entrepreneurial  performance, that is, the entrepreneurial environment has played  a moderating role in this process. Questionnaire Design 1. Psychological capital questionnaire design The research divides psychological capital into four  dimensions: confidence, hope, resilience, and optimism. Self- confidence refers to the positive belief in the cognitive model  being adjusted and taking actions to achieve the task objectives.  It is a positive state based on personal experience and formed  by the intersection of success factors and realization paths.  Resilience refers to an individual’s ability to recover quickly  from adversity, conflict, and frustration. Optimism is a tendency  of positive attribution. Some positive situations are attributed  to permanence and universality, while some negative events  are attributed to temporality. 2. Social capital questionnaire design It is believed that social capital has three dimensions:  structure, relationship, and cognition. Dimension refers to
social capital has three dimensions:  structure, relationship, and cognition. Dimension refers to  various types of connections among participants in social  activities. Relationship refers to the relationship model produced  by people in their interactions. Cognition represents the common  goal among different members and cultures. Likert’s 5-point  scoring system is adopted to calculate scores from “very different”  to “very agree. ” 3. Entrepreneurial performance questionnaire Entrepreneurial performance questionnaire has two  dimensions to measure entrepreneurial performance, namely,  survival performance and growth performance, because the  characteristic of entrepreneurial performance is that new activities  of enterprises must survive before they can develop. Survival  items range from “very different” to “very agreed, ” with scores  ranging from 1 to 5. Growth performance ranges from “far  below the industry average” to “far above the industry average, ”  with scores ranging from 1 to 5. 4. Questionnaires of entrepreneurial environment awareness Entrepreneurial environment can be divided into five aspects:  enterprise culture, enterprise incentive, enterprise support,  market network, and non-market network. Based on the above  five aspects, a design is made on the perceptual measure of  entrepreneurial environment. Likert’s five-point scoring method  is used for the cultural cognition of entrepreneurship, ranging  from “very inconsistent” to “very consistent, ” with a score  ranging from 1 to 5 points. Data Sources and Hypothesis Testing The methods of questionnaire and empirical analysis are used,  among which the software of SPSS 23.0 and AMOS 23.0 is
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  8 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682used for data analysis. Based on descriptive statistical analysis,  Cronbach’s alpha coefficient and validation factor analysis are  used to test the reliability and validity of each variable. Then,  to understand the relationship between the entrepreneurial  performance of enterprises in detail, correlation analysis on  psychological capital, social capital, and entrepreneurial  performance is carried out. The questionnaire is distributed in two forms: paper  questionnaire and online questionnaire. The new generation  of entrepreneurs from multiple entrepreneurial bases fills in  the questionnaire (the new generation of entrepreneurs mainly  come from Chuangkebang Incubation Base, Jiangning District,  Nanjing City, Jiangsu Province, Pioneer Building, High-tech  Zone, Jiangning City, Life Science and Technology Town, Nanjing  City, E-commerce Industrial Park, Jiangning City, and other  entrepreneurial bases). It involves all walks of life, including  the Internet, finance, manufacturing, and business services and  limits the age of population variables, and the age of the  target must be  under 35. A total of 500 questionnaires are  distributed in this survey, and 472 questionnaires are recovered,  with a recovery rate of 94.4%. Among them, 438 valid  questionnaires can be  used as sample analysis, and the final  valid questionnaire rate is 87.6%. The basic information part  of the respondents in the questionnaire, including gender, age,  education, and marital status, as well as related entrepreneurial  information, including the industry to which the enterprise  belongs, the time of the establishment of the enterprise, the  number of employees of the enterprise, the number of previous  entrepreneurial experiences, the main motivation of  entrepreneurship, and the factors that are considered to have  a greater impact on
motivation of  entrepreneurship, and the factors that are considered to have  a greater impact on entrepreneurship. Table  1  shows the  descriptive statistical analysis results of the effective recovery  of samples. QUESTIONNAIRE SURVEY AND  ANALYSIS RESULTS Pre-survey Results of Questionnaire Questionnaires are collected and selected before the survey.  They are analyzed to confirm the reliability. Cronbach’s alpha  factor is selected for testing. Figure  3  shows the results of  psychological capital reliability analysis. As Figure  3  signifies, according to the corrected item-total  correlation (CITC) value, the values of confidence, hope, resilience,  and optimism in the psychological capital scale are all greater  than 0.5. Deleting any one of them will lower the Cronbach’s  alpha coefficient of the dimension, which indicates that the  correlation between these dimensions is relatively high. Cronbach’s  alpha values of the four dimensions are 0.766, 0.800, 0.821, and  0.851, respectively. Generally speaking, the higher the coefficient,  the higher the reliability of the tool. In basic research, the reliability  should be  at least 0.80, while in exploratory research, it can  be  accepted as long as it reaches 0.70. The reliability between  0.70 and 0.98 is high, while the reliability below 0.35 is at a low  level. Therefore, the reliability of the four dimensions is very high.TABLE 1 |  Descriptive statistical analysis of samples. Item Category Number of  PeoplePercentage   (%) Gender Male 225 51.4 Female 213 48.6 Age 20 years old and  below5713.0 21–25 years old 80 18.2 26–30 years old 71 16.3 31–35 years old 230 52.5 Education High school and  below143.3 college 55 12.5 Undergraduate 221 50.5 Graduate and above 148 33.7 Marital status Married 247 56.5 Unmarried 191 43.5 Industry the enterprise  belongs toAgriculture, Forestry,  Animal Husbandry,  Fishing40.8 Mining industry 4 0.8 Manufacturing 40 9.2 Electricity, heat, etc. 8 1.9 Construction --- than 0.5.  When one of the dimension factors is eliminated, the Cronbach’s  alpha factor of the dimension will decrease, which shows that  the correlation between these factors is relatively high. Overall,  Cronbach’s alpha coefficients of the five dimensions are 0.757,  0.804, 0.864, 0.792, and 0.747, respectively. Therefore, the  reliability of results is relatively good. Analysis Results of Questionnaire Survey  Data Figure  7  signifies reliability analysis results of the scale. According to the reliability analysis results shown in Figure 7 ,  Cronbach’s Alpha coefficients of the four scales are all above  0.8, and the reliability is acceptable as long as it reaches 0.70,  and the reliability between 0.70 and 0.98 is high, so the reliability  is relatively good and the internal consistency is relatively high.  The four-part table can be  used herein. Figure 8  presents the validity analysis results of the four scales. As Figure  8  presents, the absolute fitting index (2/df) of  the four groups of scales is less than 3. The fitness of GFI is  greater than 0.9, the approximate errors of RMR and RMSEA  of RMS residuals are both less than 0.08, and the NFI and TABLE 1 |  Continued Item Category Number of  PeoplePercentage   (%) Influencing factors of  entrepreneurshipHome and school 56 12.8 Optimism 42 9.5 Social support 56 12.8 Self-confidence 45 10.3 Entrepreneurial  team17339.4 Tough character 46 10.6 Other 20 4.6 PCC6 PCH6 PCR6 PCO60.550.600.650.700.750.800.850.900.95Numerical valu e Dime nsion CITC  Cronbach,s Alpha1  Cronbach,s Alpha FIGURE 3 |  Reliability analysis of psychological capital (PCC6 represents six  evaluation factors of psychological capital confidence dimension, PCH6  represents six evaluation factors of hope dimension, PCR6 represents six  evaluation factors of tenacity dimension, and PCO6 represents six evaluation  factors of optimism dimension).SCS3S CR3 SCC30.700.750.800.850.900.95Numerical valu e Dime nsion CITC  Cronbach,s Alpha1
Fishing40.8 Mining industry 4 0.8 Manufacturing 40 9.2 Electricity, heat, etc. 8 1.9 Construction  industry153.5 Wholesale and retail  trade184.1 Transportation 21 4.9 Accommodation  and catering  industry112.4 Computer 78 17.7 Finance 42 9.5 Scientific research 14 3.3 Public Utilities 2 0.5 Service 11 2.4 Real estate 13 3.0 lease 10 2.2 Health care 12 2.7 Education 53 12.0 Culture and Sports 44 10.1 other 38 9.0 The time of the  establishment of the  enterpriseWithin 1 year 69 15.7 1–3 years 111 25.3 3–5 years 57 13.0 5–10 years 53 12.0 10+ years 148 34.0 The number of employees  of the enterprise10 people or less 136 31.0 11–50 people 83 19.0 51–100 people 48 10.9 101–200 people 30 6.8 More than 200  people141 32.3 The number of  entrepreneurial experiences0 274 62.5 1 time 94 21.5 More than 2 times 70 16.0 The motivation of  entrepreneurshipImprove living  quality11325.8 Improve quality of life 7 1.6 Realize personal  ideals26360.1 Conform to the  trend of social  development204.6 Other 35 7.9 (Continued) --- performance, and those who have been in  business for 1–3 years rank second. Enterprises with a start-up  time of 3–5 years rank third, those with a start-up time of ESP2E PG2 EPG40.700.720.740.760.780.800.820.840.860.880.90Numerical valu e Dime nsion CITC  Cronbach,s Alpha1  Cronbach,s Alpha FIGURE 5 |  Reliability analysis results of entrepreneurial performance scale  (ESP2 represents two evaluation factors of survival performance in  entrepreneurial performance, EPG2 represents the first two evaluation factors  of growth performance dimension, and EPG4 represents four evaluation  factors of growth performance dimension).EEC3 EEI3E ES2E EM3E EN20.550.600.650.700.750.800.850.900.95Numerical valu e Dimension CITC  Cronbach,s Alpha1  Cronbach,s Alpha FIGURE 6 |  Reliability analysis results of entrepreneurial environment  perception scale (EEC3 indicates three evaluation factors of entrepreneurial  culture in entrepreneurial environment, EEI3 indicates three evaluation factors  of entrepreneurial incentive, EES2 indicates two evaluation factors of  entrepreneurial support, EEM3 indicates three evaluation factors of market  network, and EEN2 indicates two evaluation factors of non-market network).
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  9 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682Figure 4  denotes the results of social capital reliability analysis. As Figure 4  illustrates, the social capital scale includes three  dimensions: structure, relationship, and cognition, and the CITC  values of the items corresponding to these dimensions are all  above 0.5, which indicates that the correlation between these  dimensions is relatively high. From the overall Cronbach’s alphas  coefficient, the total Cronbach’s alphas coefficients of the three  dimensions are 0.872, 0.895, and 0.798, respectively, which  indicates that the reliability of these three dimensions has  reached a relatively high level. Figure 5  implies the reliability analysis results of entrepreneurship  performance scale. As Figure 5  shows, the Entrepreneurship Performance Scale  contains only two dimensions, namely, survival performance  and growth performance. The CITC values of all factors in  the two dimensions are greater than 0.5, and removing any  one of them will reduce the Cronbach’s alpha coefficient of  the dimension, which means that the correlation between these dimensions is relatively high. Among them, the overall Cronbach’s  alpha of survival and growth dimensions are 0.864 and 0.888,  respectively. It shows that the two-dimensional scale of  entrepreneurial performance has good reliability. Figure 6  reveals the reliability analysis results of entrepreneurship  perception scale. On the scale of entrepreneurial environment awareness,  evaluation is made from five aspects: entrepreneurial culture  awareness, entrepreneurial incentive awareness, entrepreneurial  support awareness, market network awareness, and non-market  network entrepreneurial awareness. From the CITC values of  these dimensions, all dimensions have reached more than 0.5.  When one of the dimension factors is eliminated, the Cronbach’s  alpha factor of the
CR3 SCC30.700.750.800.850.900.95Numerical valu e Dime nsion CITC  Cronbach,s Alpha1  Cronbach,s Alpha FIGURE 4 |  Reliability analysis of social capital (SCS3 represents three  evaluation factors of social capital structure dimension, SCR3 represents  three evaluation factors of relationship dimension, and SCC3 represents three  evaluation factors of cognitive dimension). --- 0.344 ** 0.417 ** 0.363 ** 0.399 ** 0.810 ** 1 R 0.565 ** 0.469 ** 0.488 ** 0.444 ** 0.550 ** 0.847 ** 0.506 ** 1 C1 0.468 ** 0.362 ** 0.426 ** 0.365 ** 0.462 ** 0.839 ** 0.509 ** 0.601 ** 1 E 0.338 ** 0.301 ** 0.309 ** 0.307 ** 0.343 ** 0.407 ** 0.365 ** 0.309 ** 0.342 ** 1 S 0.388 ** 0.308 ** 0.330 ** 0.324 ** 0.379 ** 0.429 ** 0.330 ** 0.364 ** 0.377 ** 0.844 ** 1 G 0.376 ** 0.382 ** 0.386 ** 0.327 ** 0.394 ** 0.352 ** 0.382 ** 0.352 ** 0.395 ** 0.834 ** 0.408 ** 1 ***p < 0.001; **p < 0.01; and *p < 0.5. In the table, PC represents Psychological capital, SC represents Social capital, S1 represents Structural dimension, and R represents Relationship dimension. C1 stands for cognitive dimension, E for entrepreneurial performance, S for  Survival performance, and G for Growth performance.
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  10 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682CFI after mass relative adjustment are both greater than 0.90,  which meet the standards of various indexes. Based on the  above indexes, the fitting degree of the model is improved,  which proves that the measurement is more effective, and these  values are in line with each index standard. Based on the  above indexes, it can be  proved that the model has good  fitting effect and high measurement validity. In order to verify the differences in psychological capital, social  capital, and entrepreneurial performance of factors, such as gender,  age, educational background, marital status, enterprise establishment  time, and number of employees, a design is made on independent  sample T-test to conduct multiple variable analysis, respectively.  Figure  9  displays the results of independent sample T-test. In the independent sample T-test results shown in Figure 9 ,  the significant levels of psychological capital of the three variables  are all less than 0.05, indicating that there are significant  differences in psychological capital between male and female  entrepreneurs in the new generation. Relatively speaking, the  level of entrepreneurial psychological capital of men is higher  than that of women, and the average value of 3.9724 is higher  than that of 3.7561 female entrepreneurs. The significant level  of social capital and entrepreneurial performance is above 0.05,  which indicates that there is no significant difference between  social capital and entrepreneurial performance of new generation  male and female entrepreneurs. The multiple comparison results of psychological capital and  entrepreneurial performance under age differences are shown  in Figure  10 . As shown in Figure  10 , young entrepreneurs of a certain  age group show significant differences in psychological capital  and entrepreneurial
of a certain  age group show significant differences in psychological capital  and entrepreneurial performance, and the concrete embodiment  of the differences can be observed when comparing the average differences. The order of psychological capital of new generation  entrepreneurs from high to low is 31–35 years old, 26–30 years  old, and 21–25 years old, and entrepreneurs under 20 years old  have the lowest psychological capital. But from the perspective  of entrepreneurial performance, the new generation of  entrepreneurs aged 26–30 perform best as entrepreneurs, followed  by entrepreneurs aged 31–35, 21–25, and under 20. Figure  11  shows the multiple comparison results of  psychological capital under educational background differences. The results in Figure  11  show whether there are significant  differences in psychological capital among specific entrepreneurs  from different backgrounds, and the specific differences can  be  obtained by comparing the average values. From the  comparison results in Figure  11 , the new generation  entrepreneurs with master’s degree or above rank first in  psychological capital, second in psychological capital of  entrepreneurs with high school education or below, and third  in college education. Undergraduate entrepreneurs have the  lowest psychological capital. Figure  12  indicates multiple comparisons of psychological  capital of new generation entrepreneurs with different  establishment times. As shown in Figure  12 , when starting a business, the new  generation entrepreneurs set up companies with significant  differences in entrepreneurial performance according to different  time groups and find out the specific differences by comparing  the average differences. From the comparison results, it can  be  seen that the new generation of entrepreneurs who have  been in business for more than 10 years have the best  entrepreneurial performance, and those who have been in  business for 1–3 years rank second. Enterprises --- Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  13 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682problems, and have poorer psychological quality. The age  difference has a significant impact on the psychological capital  and entrepreneurial performance of the new generation  of entrepreneurs. Among them, the new generation of entrepreneurs between  the ages of 31 and 35 have the best psychological capital,  followed by 26–30 years old, and then 21–25 years old, the worst is 20 years old and below. This distribution is logical.  Obviously, the older the new generation of entrepreneurs,  the more mature their psychological capital is compared with  the younger generation. The new generation of entrepreneurs  between the ages of 26 and 30 have the best entrepreneurial  performance, followed by 31–35 years old, 21–25 years old  again, and the worst 20 year old and below. Compared with A1 B1 C1 A2 B2 C2 A3 B3 C3 A4 B4 C4-0.4-0.20.00.20.4Numerical valu e Age difference  AB  Mean difference  Standard error  Significance A1 B1 C1 A2 B2 C2 A3 B3 C3 A4 B4 C4-4-3-2-101Numerical valu e Age difference Mean differenc e  Standard error  Significance FIGURE 10 |  Multiple comparison results of psychological capital and entrepreneurial performance under different ages (A) shows the comparison results of  psychological capital under different ages; (B) shows the comparison results of entrepreneurial performance under different ages, in which A1, B1, and C1 represent  20 years old and below, A2, B2, and C2 represent 21–25 years old, A3, B3, and C3 represent 26–30 years old, and A4, B4, and C4 represent 31–35 years old. D1 E1 F1 D2 E2 F2 D3 E3 F3 D4 E4 F4-0.20.00.20.40.60.8Numerical valu e Educational differences Mean difference  Standard error  Significance FIGURE 11 |  Multiple comparison results of psychological capital under  educational differences (D1, E1, and F1 are high school and below, D2, E2,  and F2 are college degrees,
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  11 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 8326825–10 years rank fourth, and those with a start-up time of 1 year  or less rank last. Figure  13  reveals a multiple comparison of the number  of entrepreneurs. Figure  13  signifies the specific differences of psychological  capital of new generation entrepreneurs among groups with  different entrepreneurial experiences in the past, and the specific  differences can be observed by comparing the average differences.  Among them, the new generation entrepreneurs with two or  more entrepreneurial experiences have the highest psychological  capital, followed by entrepreneurs with one entrepreneurial  experience, and the worst is 0. Clearly, the experiences of more  entrepreneurs in the new generation of entrepreneurs enrich their  experiences. Make the psychological capital reach a higher level.After verifying the reliability and validity of the scale,  this paper adopts Pearson correlation analysis, using four  dimensions of psychological capital, three dimensions of  social capital, and two dimensions of entrepreneurial  performance. Firstly, the relationship between two dimensions  is investigated, and the correlation between variables is  analyzed. Table  2  lists the analysis results by using SPSS  23.0 statistical software. Pearson coefficient ranges from −1 to 1. The sign of numerical  value reflects the direction of correlation between variables,  and the absolute value of numerical value reflects the degree  of correlation between variables. The closer the absolute value  is to 1, the higher the degree of correlation between variables.  As Table  1 , whether as a whole or subdivided into dimensions, self-confidenc eh ope toughness optimisti c0123456numerical valu e dimension Number of items  Dime nsion alpha coefficien t Structural dimension Relationship dimension Cognitive dimension Survival performance Growth
t Structural dimension Relationship dimension Cognitive dimension Survival performance Growth performance1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0numerical valu e dime nsion Number of item s  Dime nsion alpha coefficien t Cultural perception Incentive perception Support perception Market network awareness Non-market network perception0.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0numerical valu e dimension Number of items  Dim ension alpha coefficien tA CB FIGURE 7 |  Reliability analysis results of the scale (A) shows the reliability analysis results of psychological capital scale, (B) shows the reliability analysis results of  social capital and entrepreneurial performance scale, and (C) shows the reliability analysis results of entrepreneurial environment perception scale.
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  12 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682psychological capital and entrepreneurial performance, social  capital, and entrepreneurial performance are all significantly  positively correlated, and the correlation coefficients are all  between 0.3 and 0.9, which are highly positively correlated. The above research shows that gender differences have a  significant impact on the psychological capital of the new  generation of entrepreneurs. In contemporary society, although  both males and females play a very significant role, actually,  entrepreneurs of different genders have different psychological  states in the process of starting a business and the psychological  capital they have to promote their own growth and performance  improvement. Male Entrepreneurs have higher psychological  capital, because compared with males, females are more  psychologically sensitive, more flustered when encountering AFI GFIN FI CFIR MSEA RMR0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0Fitting index Model Psychological capital  Social capital  Entrepreneurial perform ance  Entrepreneurial environm ent perceptio n FIGURE 8 |  Validity analysis results of the scale (AFI is the absolute fitting  index; GFI, NFI, CFI, RMSEA, and RMR are the goodness-of-fit evaluation  indexes of AMOS software). Psychological capital Social capital Entrepreneurial performance0123456Numerical valu e variabl e Male mean  Fem ale mean  F value  Sig.  T value  Sig. Double tail FIGURE 9 |  Independent sample T-test results.TABLE 2 |  Results of Pearson analysis of relations. Variable PC Confidence Hope Toughness Optimism SC S1 R C1 E S G PC 1 confidence 0.795 ** 1 hope 0.892 ** 0.630 ** 1 toughness 0.898 ** 0.594 ** 0.746 ** 1 optimism 0.86** 0.523 ** 0.689 ** 0.748 ** 1 SC 0.591 ** 0.471 ** 0.534 ** 0.470 ** 0.566 ** 1 S1 0.442 ** 0.344 ** 0.417 ** 0.363 ** 0.399 ** 0.810 ** 1 R 0.565 ** 0.469 ** 0.488 ** 0.444 ** 0.550 ** 0.847
differences (D1, E1, and F1 are high school and below, D2, E2,  and F2 are college degrees, D3, E3, and F3 are undergraduate degrees, and  D4, E4, and F4 are master’s and above).W1X1Y1Z1W2X2Y2Z2W3X3Y3Z3W4X4Y4Z4W5X5Y5Z5-0.4-0.20.00.20.40.60.8Numerical valu e Educational differences Mean differenc e  Standard error  Significance FIGURE 12 |  Multiple comparison results of psychological capital of new  generation entrepreneurs with different enterprise establishment times (In  Figure, W1, X1, Y1, and Z1 are within 1 year of enterprise establishment, W2,  X2, Y2, and Z2 are 1–3 years of enterprise establishment, W3, X3, Y3, and Z3  are 3–5 years of enterprise establishment, and W4, X4, Y4, and Z4 are  5–10 years of enterprise establishment, W5).
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  14 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682the 31–35-year-old group, they are more motivated and  energetic, and they are more stable than the younger age  group, and their entrepreneurial performance is naturally  higher. Educational differences also have a significant impact  on the psychological capital of the new generation of  entrepreneurs. The correlation of variables between pairs  indicates that the proposed theoretical hypothesis H1 is  established, that is, the psychological capital of employees  has a significant positive impact on their entrepreneurial  performance. The four dimensions of psychological capital,  self-confidence, hope, resilience, and optimism have certain  influences on the two dimensions of entrepreneurial  performance, survival, and growth performance, respectively.  The results show that the four dimensions have a significant  positive impact on the two dimensions of entrepreneurial  performance, that is, the improvement of any psychological  capital dimension will lead to a significant increase in  entrepreneurial performance of the new generation of  entrepreneurs. Hypotheses H1a, H1b, H1c, H1d, H1e, H1f,  H1g, and H1h are all established. The test results show that  the proposed theoretical hypothesis H2 holds, that is, employees’  social capital has a significant positive impact on entrepreneurial  performance. It examines the influence of the three dimensions  of social capital: the structural dimension, the cognitive  dimension, and the relational dimension on the two dimensions  of entrepreneurial performance, survival, and growth  performance, respectively. The results show that all three  dimensions have a significant positive impact on the two  dimensions of entrepreneurial performance, that is, the  improvement of any social capital dimension will lead to a  significant increase in the entrepreneurial performance of
social capital dimension will lead to a  significant increase in the entrepreneurial performance of the  new generation of entrepreneurs. Hypotheses H2a, H2b, H2c, H2d, H2e, and H2f are established. Meanwhile, the influence  of various dimensions of social capital on entrepreneurial  performance is greater than that of psychological capital. The  theoretical hypothesis H3 is partially established, that is,  perception of the entrepreneurial environment plays a partial  moderating role in the relationship between psychological  capital and entrepreneurial performance. Among them, the  perception of the entrepreneurial environment has no significant  moderating effect on the relationship between psychological  capital confidence dimension and survival performance, the  relationship between hope dimension and survival performance,  resilience dimension and survival performance, optimism  dimension, and survival performance. Hypotheses H3a, H3b,  H3c, and H3d are not established. The perception of the  entrepreneurial environment plays a positive and significant  moderating effect on the relationship between the psychological  capital self-confidence dimension and the growth performance,  the hope dimension and the growth performance, the resilience  dimension and the growth performance, and the optimism  dimension and the growth performance. The better the  perception of the entrepreneurial environment, the stronger  the effect. Hypotheses H3e, H3f, H3g, and H3h are established.  The theoretical hypothesis H4 is partially established, that  is, the perception of the entrepreneurial environment plays  a partial moderating role in the relationship between social  capital and entrepreneurial performance. Among them, the  perception of the entrepreneurial environment plays a significant  negative moderating role between the social capital structure  dimension and survival performance, and the relationship  between the relationship dimension and survival performance.  The
and the relationship  between the relationship dimension and survival performance.  The better the perception of the entrepreneurial environment,  the weaker the effect. Hypotheses H4a and H4b are established.  However, the perception of the entrepreneurial environment  does not have a significant moderating effect on the relationship  between the social capital cognitive dimension and survival  performance, and hypothesis H4c is established. The perception  of the entrepreneurial environment does not have a significant  moderating effect on the relationship between social capital  structure dimension and growth performance, relationship  dimension and growth performance, and hypotheses H4d and  H4e are not established. While the perception of the  entrepreneurial environment has a significant negative  moderating effect on the relationship between social capital  cognition and growth performance, and the better the  entrepreneurial environment perception, the weaker the effect,  hypothesis H4f is established. CONCLUSION The psychological and social capital of the new generation  entrepreneurs are analyzed primarily, entrepreneurial  performance is selected as the evaluation result, and  entrepreneurial environment is regarded as external adjustment  variable. Attention is focused on the demographic data of  entrepreneurial variables and factors that can affect the  psychological, social, and entrepreneurial performance of M1 N1 M2 N2 M3 N3-2.5-2.0-1.5-1.0-0.50.00.5Numerical valu e Educational differences Mean difference  Standard error  Significance FIGURE 13 |  Multiple comparison of entrepreneurs’ entrepreneurial times (in  the figure, M1 and N1 represent zero entrepreneurial times, M2 and N2  represent 1–2 entrepreneurial times, and M3 and N3 represent 2 or more  entrepreneurial times).
in the  aspect of sample collection, by combining online and offline  forms, good results have been achieved. Quantitative support  has collected a sufficient number of surveys, but the sample  distribution range is too concentrated, and there is room  for further optimization. Thirdly, entrepreneurship is a  dynamic process. Investigation is only concentrated on the  influence of psychological and social capital on entrepreneurial  performance in the same period. Unable to consider the  relationship between entrepreneurship and time, so the results  are not accurate enough. In the future research, the above  points will be  given more attention to make the research  results more valuable and convincing.DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT The original contributions presented in the study are included  in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can  be  directed to the corresponding author. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS All authors listed have made a substantial, direct, and intellectual  contribution to the work and approved it for publication. FUNDING Education Programme foundation, Education bureau of Ningbo  city 202021YGH039. Education Programme Foundation.  Project on the Integration of Industry cooperation   HX2019129. Project on the Integration of Industry cooperation   HX2020162. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 202021YGH039 Research on the construction of industrial  College of applied undergraduate colleges under the background  of industry-education integration, Education planning topic of  Ningbo, Education Programme foundation, and Education  bureau of Ningbo city. GH2022348 Research on the construction system of Industrial  College of Applied Undergraduate University based on the strategic  idea of integrating industry and education to serve local development,  Education planning topic of Zhejiang Province, and Education  Programme Foundation, Higher Education of Zhejiang   Province. HX2019129 Key technology and application research of  computer room monitoring and
Province. HX2019129 Key technology and application research of  computer room monitoring and management system based on  virtual reality, industry-university-research cooperation project,  Project on the Integration of Industry cooperation. HX2020162 ehafo AI algorithm system development, industry- university-research cooperation project, Project on the Integration  of Industry cooperation.   REFERENCES Aagaard, A., Saari, U. A., and Mkinen, S. J. (2020). Mapping the types of  business experimentation in creating sustainable value: A case study of  cleantech start-ups. J. Clean. Prod.  279:123182. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.123182 Albright, J. (2019). Paranoid pilots Club A few techniques from a charter  member. Bus. Commer. Aviat.  115, 26–32. Alexander, R., and Fry, A. (2019). Strategic design and the future of work- and-weliness. Design Health  3, 135–154. doi: 10.1080/24735132.2019.1584024 Anglin, A. H., Short, J. C., Drover, W ., Stevenson, R. M., McKenny, A. F., and  Allison, T. H. (2018). The power of positivity? The influence of positive  psychological capital language on crowdfunding performance. J. Bus. Ventur.   33, 470–492. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusvent.2018.03.003 Arias, E., Barba-Sánchez, V ., Carrión, C., and Casado, R. (2018). Enhancing  entrepreneurship education in a Master's degree in computer engineering: A project-based learning approach. Admin. Sci.  8, 58–74. doi: 10.3390/ admsci8040058 Badakhshian, S., and Samiee, F. (2020). The effectiveness of a vocational  rehabilitation program on the psychological Capital in People with spinal  cord injury. Iranian J. Rehabil. Res. Nursing  7, 11–22. doi: 10.29252/ijrn.7.1.11 Balboni, B., Bortoluzzi, G., Pugliese, R., and Tracogna, A. (2019). Business  model evolution, contextual ambidexterity and the growth performance of  high-tech start-ups. J. Bus. Res.  99, 115–124. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.   02.029 Barba-Sánchez, V ., and Atienza-Sahuquillo, C. (2017). Entrepreneurial motivation  and
02.029 Barba-Sánchez, V ., and Atienza-Sahuquillo, C. (2017). Entrepreneurial motivation  and self-employment: evidence from expectancy theory. Int. Entrep. Manag.  J. 13, 1097–1115. doi: 10.1007/s11365-017-0441-z Barba-Sánchez, V ., Mitre, M., and Del Brío, J. (2022). The entrepreneurial  intention of university students: An environmental perspective. Eur. Res.  Manag. Bus. Econ.  28:100184. doi: 10.1016/j.iedeen.2021.100184
Wang et al. Entrepreneurial Performance of the New GenerationFrontiers in Psychology  | www.frontiersin.org  16 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 832682Chambers, D., Mclaughlin, P . A., and Stanley, L. (2019). Barriers to prosperity:  the harmful impact of entry regulations on income inequality. Public Choice   180, 165–190. doi: 10.1007/s11127-018-0498-4 Chen, M. Y ., Liu, J., Ma, H. Y ., and Zhang, Y . H. (2019). Research on the  impact of psychological capital and entrepreneurial opportunity identification  of the new generation of migrant workers on entrepreneurial performance.  J. Sichuan Univ. Arts Sci.  29, 103–110. Desai, A., and Dearmond, S. (2021). Differences in consulting experiences with  for-profit and non-profit clients: implications for practice and research. Int.  J. Manag. Educ.  19:100554. doi: 10.1016/j.ijme.2021.100554 Harms, P . D., Krasikova, D. V ., and Fred, L. (2018). Not me, But reflects me:  validating a simple implicit measure of psychological capital. J. Pers. Assess.   100, 551–562. doi: 10.1080/00223891.2018.1480489 Iazzolino, G., Greco, D., Verteramo, S., Attanasio, A. L., Carravetta, G., and  Granato, T. (2019). An integrated methodology for supporting the development  and the performance evaluation of academic spin-offs. Meas. Bus. Excell.   24, 69–89. doi: 10.1108/MBE-09-2019-0097 Kang, H. J., and Busser, J. A. (2018). Impact of service climate and psychological  capital on employee engagement: The role of organizational hierarchy. Int.  J. Hosp. Manag.  75, 1–9. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhm.2018.03.003 Lei, X. L. (2018). Research on the relationship between college Students'  entrepreneurs' psychological capital, entrepreneurial support and entrepreneurial  performance. J. Hei he  Univ.  9, 59–61. Li, J. (2018). Research on social capital and urban entrepreneurial performance  of migrant workers-Based on the data of 13 cities in the East. Lanzhou J.   03, 173–184. Linton, G. O., and Kask, J. (2017). Configurations of entrepreneurial --- engagement,  and surface acting: a delineation of supervisor-employee emotional contagion  effects. Manag. Decis.  57, 3200–3216. doi: 10.1108/MD-02-2018-0196 Y ang, X. L., and Wang, C. (2019). Resource acquisition and immigrant  entrepreneurial performance-based on the survey data of the Three Gorges  Reservoir Area Rural economy. J. Social Capital  02, 62–69. Zhao, B., and Xu, S. P . (2015). Research on the correlation between entrepreneurial  involvement, entrepreneurial environment perception and entrepreneurial  performance of the new generation of entrepreneurs. Jiangsu Bus.Theory   26, 70–74. Zhou, W ., Y ang, X., Li, Y ., and Zhang, Y . (2019). Pattern versus level: a new  look at the personality-entrepreneurship relationship. Int. J. Entrep. Behav.  Res. 25, 150–168. doi: 10.1108/IJEBR-03-2018-0176 Conflict of Interest:  The authors declare that the research was conducted in  the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be  construed  as a potential conflict of interest. Publisher’s Note:  All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the  authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations,  or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may  be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is  not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Copyright © 2022 Wang, Zhou and Wang. This is an open-access article distributed  under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY) . The use,  distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original  author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication  in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,  distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Lanzhou J.   03, 173–184. Linton, G. O., and Kask, J. (2017). Configurations of entrepreneurial orientation  and competitive strategy for high performance. J. Bus. Res.  70, 168–176.  doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.08.022 Lukes, M., Longo, M. C., and Zouhar, J. (2019). Do business incubators really  enhance entrepreneurial growth? Evidence from a large sample of innovative  Italian start-ups. Technovation  25, 82–83. doi: 10.1016/j.technovation.2018.07.008 Ma, H. Y ., and Wang, Z. D. (2018). Research on the impact of social capital  and psychological capital on migrant workers' entrepreneurial performance -  based on 889 household survey data in Shaanxi Province. J. Agri. Forest.  Eco. Manag.  17, 738–745. Mas, F. D., and Paoloni, P . (2019). A relational capital perspective on social  sustainability. The case of female entrepreneurship in Italy. Meas. Bus. Excell.   24, 114–130. doi: 10.1108/MBE-08-2019-0086 Miao, C., Qian, S., and Humphrey, R. H. (2019). The challenges of lean  management research and practice in the field of entrepreneurship: The  roles of I-O psychology theories and I-O psychologists. Ind. Organ. Psychol.   12, 260–263. doi: 10.1017/iop.2019.46 Miller, M. R., Alexander, R. J., Arbige, V . A., Dell, R. F., Kremer, S. R.,  McClune, B. P ., et al. (2019). Optimal allocation of students to naval  nuclear-power training units. Oper. Res.  59, 95–97. doi: 10.1287/ inte.2017.0905 Obschonka, M., Lee, N., Rodríguez-Pose, A., Eichstaedt, J. C., and Ebert, T.  (2020). Big data methods, social media, and the psychology of  entrepreneurial regions: capturing cross-county personality traits and  their impact on entrepreneurship in the USA. Small Bus. Econ.  55,  567–588. doi: 10.1007/s11187-019-00204-2 Osman, T., Thomas, T., Mondschein, A., and Taylor, B. D. (2019). Does traffic  congestion influence the location of new business establishments? An analysis  of the San Francisco Bay Area. Urban Stud.  56, 1026–1041. doi:  10.1177/0042098018784179Oukes, T., --- of the San Francisco Bay Area. Urban Stud.  56, 1026–1041. doi:  10.1177/0042098018784179Oukes, T., Raesfeld, A. V ., and Groen, A. (2019). Power in a startup’s relationships  with its established partners: interactions between structural and behavioural  power. Ind. Mark. Manag.  80, 68–83. doi: 10.1016/j.indmarman.2017.12.007 Pan, Y ., Huang, P ., and Gopal, A. (2019). Storm clouds on the horizon? New  entry threats and R&D Investments in the U.S. IT industry. Inf. Syst. Res.   30, 540–562. doi: 10.1287/isre.2018.0816 Qasim, A., and Jader, D. S. A. (2021). The relationship Between strategic  improvisation And entrepreneurial performance: analytical research In The  ministry Of agriculture. J. Contemp. Issues Bus. Gov.  27, 1030–1039. Salerno, J. A. (2019). Products & services previews. Bus. Commer. Aviat.  115,  70–71. Sherman, P . J. (2019). Questions to ask Before launching a continuous improvement  program. APICS  29, 14–15. Silva, D. S., Ghezzi, A., Aguiar, R., et al. (2020). Lean startup, agile methodologies  and customer development for business model innovation: A systematic  review and research agenda. Int. J. Entrep. Behav. Res.  26, 595–628. doi:  10.1108/IJEBR-07-2019-0425 Stefanis, P . D. (2020). Making projects and business in green chemistry: creating  a winning start-up, fund raising, and writing competitive research proposals.  Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal.  179, 511–524. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64337-7.00026-4 Tkacz, M. (2016). New generation of social entrepreneurs: exploratory research  and cross case study analysis of new generation of social enterprises. Ekonomia  Społeczna  2, 20–37. doi: 10.15678/ES.2016.2.02 Webber, D. J., Kitagawa, F., and Plumridge, A. (2020). Student entrepreneurial  propensities in the individual-organisational-environmental nexus. Eco. Issues   25, 31–59. Wu, T. J., and Wu, Y . J. (2019). Innovative work behaviors, employee engagement,  and surface acting: a delineation of supervisor-employee emotional contagion  effects.
En resumen, el estudio examina la influencia del capital psicológico y social en el rendimiento empresarial de la nueva generación de emprendedores. Los resultados indican que factores como la edad, la educación y el tiempo de establecimiento de la empresa tienen un impacto significativo en el capital psicológico de los emprendedores. Se encontró una correlación positiva significativa entre el capital psicológico, el capital social y el rendimiento empresarial. El estudio también sugiere que la percepción del entorno empresarial juega un papel moderador entre el capital psicológico y el rendimiento empresarial, así como entre el capital social y el rendimiento empresarial. Sin embargo, se identificaron limitaciones en el proceso de investigación, como la autoevaluación subjetiva en la medición de variables, posibles sesgos en la selección de la muestra y la necesidad de utilizar métodos estadísticos más avanzados en el análisis de datos. Se destaca la importancia de realizar más investigaciones para abordar estas limitaciones y proporcionar una comprensión más completa de la relación entre el capital psicológico, el capital social y el rendimiento empresarial en la nueva generación de emprendedores.
