21ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.Received September 14, 2012 / Accepted Jan 20, 2013 J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 Spin-off Process and the Development of Academic Entrepreneur’s   Social Capital  Cândido Borges1, Louis Jacques Filion2 Abstract So far, there has been very little in-depth research on how the spin-off process contributes to the development of  academic entrepreneurs’ social capital. In this inductive, exploratory and qualitative study, we examine eight academic  entrepreneurship case studies. Based on our findings, we propose three mechanisms to explain the contribution of the spin- off process. They are the entrepreneurs´ affiliation with the university, the entrepreneurs´ immersion in the university´s  network of relationships, and the new venture creation preparation given to the entrepreneurs by the university. Keywords: academic entrepreneurship; entrepreneurship; incubators; networks; social capital; spin-offs; technological  entrepreneurship; university spin-offs. 1 Faculdade de Administração, Ciências Contábeis e Ciências Econômicas, Universidade Federal de Goiás, Caixa Postal 131, 74001-970 -  Goiânia-GO, Brasil. Phone: 55-62-32758497. email: candidoborges@gmail.com 2 Chaire d’entrepreneuriat Rogers-J.-A.-Bombardier, HEC Montréal, 3000 chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montréal (Québec) H3C  2A7, Canada. Phone: 1-514-340-6339. email: louisjacques.filion@hec.ca. (3)1019 borges
22ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 used and the fourth section presents and examines the find - ings. The fifth and last section summarizes and discusses the  main aspects of the research. Academic spin-offs and social capital This section presents the two main topics that form the  theoretical foundation for the study: (i) academic spin-offs  and (ii) the social capital of academic entrepreneurs. Academic spin-offs The term spin-off is used in the literature to refer to both  the outcome and the process that generates that outcome.  As a process, it refers to the fact that the new firm, or its  entrepreneurs, or the technology used in the new venture,  or all three, either left or were released by a pre-existing  organization, also called the mother organization. The result  of this process is a new venture, the spin-off. Basically, an academic spin-off occurs as follows: The entre - preneurs, during their activities as students, professors or  researchers at a university, acquire technological knowledge  or develop a new technology that will, in the future, be used  with the support of the university´s business incubator (or  another mechanism) to develop a product or a business con - cept that will be explored commercially by a new venture. The mother organization, the entrepreneurs and the tech - nology are the three key elements of a spin-off process (Fil - ion, Luc and Fortin, 2003; Meyer, 2003; Pirnay, Surlemont and  Nlemvo, 2003). In the case of academic spin-offs, the mother  organizations are traditionally universities, but in a broader  sense, all science and technology institutions can act as gen - erators of technological spin-offs (Freitas et al., 2011; Ras - mussen, 2011; Shane, 2004). Both the entrepreneur and the  technology that will be used as the foundation for the new  venture
Both the entrepreneur and the  technology that will be used as the foundation for the new  venture stem from the mother organization. The entrepre - neur usually works for or studies at it. The technology used  by the spin-off is taught, developed or improved by it. Universities, however, can also give other types of support  to the creation of new business ventures, beside the fact  that the entrepreneurs and the technology stem from them.  Examples include access to research laboratories, technol - ogy transfer offices, promotion of an entrepreneurial cul - ture within the university, financial help, consulting sessions  or courses in management and sales, office space for nas - cent ventures, and access to the university’s network of  relationships (Clarysse, Wright and de Velde, 2011; Meyer,  2003; OECD, 2001; Shane, 2004;). One of the main support  tools given by universities to the spin-off process is the busi - ness incubator, where many support services can be found  (Grimaldi and Grandi, 2005; Versiani and Guimarães, 2006;  Wolffenbüttel, Fracasso and  Bignetti, 2004).Introduction Research has shown that one of the factors that may con - tribute to the success of a new venture is the entrepreneur’s  social capital (Anderson, Park and Jack, 2007; Audretsch,  Aldridge and Sanders, 2011; Davidsson and Honig, 2003;  Kim and Aldrich, 2005; Neergaard and Madsen, 2004). Social  capital allows entrepreneurs to obtain resources that would  otherwise not be available to them at all, or would only be  available at a much higher cost in terms of time, money and  effort. Given the significance of social capital to entrepreneurs, re - searchers have examined its features, how it develops and  how it is used to benefit a nascent venture. Studies to date  have shown that the initial social capital of entrepreneurs  (Liao and Welsch, 2002; Murray, 2004), as well as their social  skills (Baron, 2004; Baron and Markman, 2003) and their net - working efforts (Bourdieu, 1986;
skills (Baron, 2004; Baron and Markman, 2003) and their net - working efforts (Bourdieu, 1986; Ferraro, 2003), are all key  elements in its development. All these studies, however, were limited by one specific fac - tor, namely that they focused on the creation of traditional  businesses without the support of a mother organization.  This is clearly not the context for academic spin-offs, which  are technological ventures born inside a mother organiza - tion (the university) and which receive a range of support  from that organization. Some of the social capital developed  by academic entrepreneurs results from the spin-off pro - cess. This is due to the fact that the university, with its net - work of connections, its credibility and its support structure,  is able help its entrepreneurs to develop new contacts and  expand their social capital (Chandra and Silva, 2012; Grandi  and  Grimaldi, 2003; Hughes, Ireland and Morgan, 2007; Mian,  1996; Shane, 2004; T otterman and Sten, 2005; Uzunca, 2011). Despite this, there has been very little in-depth research  into how the spin-off process contributes to the develop - ment of academic entrepreneur’s social capital. This paper  presents an inductive, exploratory and qualitative study that  was designed to address this gap in current knowledge. Eight academic entrepreneurship case studies, chosen on  the basis of maximum variation criteria (Patton, 2002), were  examined. Maximum variation was guaranteed by the key el - ements in the spin-off process: the mother organization (the  university), the entrepreneurs and the technology. The study  itself was based on the following research question: How  does the spin-off process contribute to the development of  academic entrepreneur’s social capital? This introduction constitutes the first part of the paper. The  second part presents the theoretical references used for the  research, while the third section describes the methodology
23ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 more demanding in terms of the resources needed (Pirnay,  Surlemont  and Nlemvo, 2003). In their typology, Pirnay, Surlemont and Nlemvo (2003) con - sider only cases where the technologies in question stem  from the university. They may be codified or tacit technol - ogies, developed or learned at the university. However, in  some cases the technology may originate from an organiza - tion other than the university or may even be hybrid, for  example when the spin-off utilizes technology developed  outside the university, but adds the university’s own techno - logical knowledge to it. Academic entrepreneur’s social capital Adler and Kwon (2002) identified two mains standpoints or  perspectives used by researchers working on the concept of  social capital: (i) the external perspective, where the study  focuses on the external relationships of one actor; and (ii)  the internal perspective, which focuses on the internal rela - tionships of a group within the community. In this particular  study, we adopt the former perspective, focusing our atten - tion on the entrepreneur’s network of contacts. A contact is  an actor with whom the focal actor (or entrepreneur) has a  direct connection (Lemineux and Ouimet, 2004). A contact  may be an individual or an organization. Table 1 shows the  main contacts of academic entrepreneurs. These contacts can be classified or grouped according to  the role they play or the resources they make available to  the entrepreneurs (Johannisson, Ramirez-Pasillas and Karls - son, 2002; Julien, 2000; Lechner and Dowling, 2003). Exam - ples would include the moral support network (usually fam - ily and friends), the technological network (researchers and  the university), and the business network (customers, sup - pliers).  A contact may be both
and  the university), and the business network (customers, sup - pliers).  A contact may be both a friend and a customer, or a The second key component for the spin-off process is the  entrepreneur. University spin-off entrepreneurs are usually  professors, researchers, or undergraduate or graduate stu - dents (Nicolaou and Birley, 2003). They may or may not leave  the university after the new business venture is created.  Many of them lead a double professional life, combining aca - demic activities at the university with business activities in  the new venture. However, it is also possible for a spin-off to  be created by a surrogate entrepreneur (Radosevich, 1995). In this case, the mother organization transfers the technol - ogy or provides support for the creation of the new venture,  but the entrepreneur comes from outside the university. The  surrogate entrepreneur can start the new venture alone or  can build a partnership with the university’s researchers,  professors or students (Franklin and Wright, 2000). Most technological ventures, spin-offs included, are created  by a team of entrepreneurs as opposed to a single entrepre - neur (Cooper and Dailly, 1997; Neergaard, 2005). In the case  of academic spin-offs, these teams, rather than being com - posed of people from one category (professors, students or  outsiders), are often made up of entrepreneurs from differ - ent categories. As a result, professors and students may well  be part of the same team (Nicolau and Birley, 2003). The third component in the spin-off process is the nature  of the technology to be transferred to the new venture by  the university. According to Pirnay, Surlemont and Nlemvo  (2003), the knowledge transferred to a spin-off can be clas - sified into two main groups: tacit and codified. Tacit knowl - edge is associated with individuals, and it is more personal,  gathered over the years through experience and academic  activities. In contrast, codified knowledge may belong to the
through experience and academic  activities. In contrast, codified knowledge may belong to the  university and be protected by a patent. The creation of a  spin-off with patented technology is usually lengthier and  Family members Friends University University members Professors and researchers Research institutions PartnersCustomers Suppliers Banks Venture capitalists Other actors in the financial sector Consultants AccountantsOther entrepreneurs Organizations supporting  entrepreneurship Government agencies Professional and business associations Table 1. Main contacts of academic entrepreneurs. Sources: Aldrich and Zimmer (1986), Birley (1985), Dubini and Aldrich (1991), Hill,  McGowan and Drummond (1999), Julien (2000), Pirnay (2001).
24ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 benefit the entrepreneur.  An increase in benefit only occurs  as the contacts themselves become more diverse in terms  of demographic traits, the resources they bring and the net - works to which they belong (Aldrich and Carter, 2004; Al - drich, Rosen and Woodward, 1987). Methods The study presented in this paper was inductive, explora - tory and qualitative in nature. Eight university spin-off cases  were examined. The choice of this particular number of cas - es was the result of theoretical saturation (Eisenhardt, 1989;  Strauss and Corbin, 1998) during the codification and data  analysis phase. Table 2 below summarizes the methodologi - cal approach used in this research. The eight cases examined were drawn from different tech - nological fields and different Brazilian universities. The ven - tures themselves were founded between 2000 and 2003.  Table 3 provides additional information about the selected  cases. T o ensure confidentiality, the ventures´ names are fic - titious. All the cases were two to four-year-old spin-offs (at the time  of data collection) and were chosen to ensure what Patton  (2002) refers to as maximum variation. The key components  to the spin-off basis (entrepreneur, mother organization and  technology) were used to ensure the maximum variation  criterion. In the variation of the entrepreneur component, family member and an investor.  As a result, some contacts  may play two different roles in the entrepreneur’s network  (Hite, 2003; Johannisson, 1996; Uzzi, 1996). This is the case  when a friend who is a researcher provides the technologi - cal entrepreneur with both moral support and technological  information. Contacts are described as multiplex when they  play different roles or provide the entrepreneur with differ - ent resources
multiplex when they  play different roles or provide the entrepreneur with differ - ent resources (Kim and  Aldrich, 2005). The social capital of entrepreneurs tends to change in size  and in the diversity of the contacts in the network. In the  case of size, Hansen’s (2000) study of 52 new business ven - tures drawn from all economic sectors in the United States  showed that, as a new venture is created, the number of  contacts used by the entrepreneurs tends to grow. Hansen  divided the process into four phases and checked the num - ber of contacts in each phase.  He found that the number  of contacts increased as the process advanced: Phase 1 (7  contacts), Phase 2 (8 contacts), Phase 3 (11 contacts) and  Phase 4 (12 contacts). In the case of diversity, Perez and Sanchez (2003) in Spain  and Johannisson (1998) in Sweden studied academic spin- offs and concluded that a network composed initially of sci - entific contacts would gradually be transformed to include  business contacts. Diversity is important because the simple fact of having  more contacts in the network is not, of itself, sufficient to  Research method - Multiple case analysis (Eisenhardt, 1989; Yin, 2003) Number of cases - Eight  Criteria used in case choice- University spin-offs two to four years-old. - Maximum variation (Patton, 2002) in the key elements of spin-offs   (entrepreneur, mother organization and technology). Data collection- Semi-structured interviews, research notes and secondary data - 35 interviews (2 hours average): 22 with entrepreneurs/13 with managers and  other incubator staff Data analysis and  interpretation- Transcription of interviews - Interview codification and analysis with the help of the NVivo 2.0 software - Description file for each case - Analytical tables - Intra- and inter-case comparisons - Comparison with the literature Table 2. Summary of methodological procedures.
25ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 the incubators. In addition, all the ventures, universities and  incubators in the cases studied were visited and observed.  The interview guide was structured in order to identify the  characteristics of the contacts used to carry out the activi - ties involved in the creation of the venture, as well as the  origin of those contacts and the role played by the spin-off  process in establishing a relationship with the contact and  utilizing it. The interviews were transcribed and submitted to the inter - viewees for validation. They were then coded and analyzed  using the Nvivo 2.0 application. Contact categories were  created during the coding process, and categories were also  created to represent the contributions of the spin-off pro - cess to the entrepreneurs´ social capital. The contribution  categories were grouped together under three headings or  mechanisms: (i) affiliation, (ii) immersion and (iii) prepara - tion. They will be explained in more detail in the presenta - tion and analysis of the findings.the cases represent different types of entrepreneurs – stu - dents, professors and external entrepreneurs. In the varia - tion of the mother organization component, the selected  cases stemmed from universities and incubators that offered  different research and support structures for entrepreneur - ship.  The mother organizations in question ranged from  large universities with solid, respected structures to small  colleges with nascent structures. Finally, in the third com - ponent (technology), the technologies transferred to the  spin-offs by the universities included both tacit and coded  technologies. T o collect the data for the study, 35 semi-structured inter - views were conducted, lasting an average of two hours each.  Of the 35 interviews, 22 were
inter - views were conducted, lasting an average of two hours each.  Of the 35 interviews, 22 were with entrepreneurs and 13  with incubator employees (managers or other staff mem - bers). Secondary data sources (reports, advertising material,  articles and the Internet) were also used to collect informa - tion on the ventures, the entrepreneurs, the universities and  Table 3. Cases.Venture FoundationBusiness  Activity# of empCase variation in relation to key components in the  spin-off process Type of  entrepreneur*Type of mother  organization**Type of  technology Aprendiz 2003Communication  Software3 Surrogate (2) LowNot  patented Freeway 2003Software and  training13Students (1)  and surrogate  (3) AverageNot  patented Imagem 2003 Geoprocessing 0 Students (2) LowNot  patented Quimitech 2002Automated  systems for  chemical  analysis3Professors (3)  and researchers  (1)AveragePatented Games 2000 Computer games 6Students (3)  and surrogate  (1)HighNot  patented Sensores 2003 Optical sensors 45Professors (2)  and students  (3)HighPatented Visitech 2003Artificial vision  systems8 Students (2) HighNot  patented Webdesign 2002 Websites 2Students (2)  and surrogate  (1)LowNot  patented * -The numbers in brackets indicate the number of this type of entrepreneur among the venture creators.  ** - The classification patterns “high”, “average’ and “low” were defined by the researchers according to the research structure in the university  (number of labs, researchers and scientific production), its reputation and the services of fered to the entrepreneurs by its business incubator .
26ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 tacts that the nascent venture and the technology it uses are  credible. The nascent venture’s affiliation with the university  adds credibility and makes it easier to mobilize social capi - tal, as already demonstrated by Grandi and Grimaldi (2003),  Mian (1996) and T otterman and Sten (2005). The possibility of using the university´s credibility in early  attempts to establish a business relationship with a finance  provider, a customer or another contact is important to  nascent ventures because they still need to build their legiti - macy in the market (Delmar and Shane, 2003). This possibil - ity is especially important to young university entrepreneurs  who have few accomplishments to show when attempting  to attract or convince a new contact, as illustrated by this  citation from an entrepreneur: You are not just another a small company located wherever. You  can say you are located inside the university´s incubator, that  you have partners, that you have the university behind you, a  very strong name. [...]. We used this a lot to sell our projects. The  credibility of being in the university´s incubator was fundamental  (Visitech) T o explore affiliation, entrepreneurs connect their image to  that of the university. They mention their affiliation to their  contacts. They also mention it in the promotional material  they use, including leaflets and websites, where the logos of  the university and the incubator are displayed. However, not all universities enjoy the same reputation. The  fact of being incubated in a university that is well-known  for its research and technology transfer tends to lend more  credibility to the entrepreneur´s venture than if it had been  incubated in a small university that has not yet built its repu - tation. An affiliation that
been  incubated in a small university that has not yet built its repu - tation. An affiliation that gives entrepreneurs preferential access to   certain contacts The second contribution made by affiliation to the develop - ment of social capital is preferential access to contacts and  resources, mainly within the university, but also outside it.The contacts used by the entrepreneurs were classified ac - cording to the network category to which they belonged  (see the examples in Table 4). Where a contact was a multi - plex (i.e. performing many functions), it was classified by its  main function. The analysis procedure was supported and completed by  tools and techniques suggested by Miles and Huberman  (1994), and included a file containing the description of each  case, analytical tables and intra- and inter-case comparisons. Findings The spin-off process contributes to the development of aca - demic entrepreneurs´ social capital via three mechanisms,  namely (i) affiliation, (ii) immersion and (iii) preparation – in  other words, the entrepreneur’s affiliation with the universi - ty, the entrepreneur’s immersion in the university’s network  of relationships, and the new business venture preparation  given to the entrepreneur by the university. First contribution mechanism:  Entrepreneur´s affiliation with the university. With regard to the first mechanism, affiliation, academic en - trepreneurs are affiliated with their university, and are a part  of it. When the entrepreneurs are students, researchers or  university professors, the connection is academic in nature.  When incubated, the entrepreneurs install their nascent  venture inside the university’s incubator. This affiliation with  the university adds to the formation of the entrepreneurial  social capital because, first, it lends credibility to the entre - preneur’s project, and second, it gives the entrepreneurs  preferential access to certain contacts and resources.  These  two aspects will be examined
preferential access to certain contacts and resources.  These  two aspects will be examined in the following sub-sections. An affiliation that lends credibility to the entrepreneur’s ventures Because universities usually have good reputations in society,  academic entrepreneurs can lend credibility to their ven - tures by telling their contacts about their affiliation. Affili - ation helps them to open doors and convince certain con - Table 4. Contact classification.Category Examples Technological network Professors, students, laboratories Support network Incubator staff, consultants, SEBRAE (Brazilian small  business support agency) Financial network Credit agencies, banks, financial angels Business network Clients, suppliers, business partners Other Parents, other relatives
27ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 Entrepreneurs go through two different types of immersion  in the university’s network, first as a university member and  second as an incubatee. Immersion as a university member Immersion as a university member occurs when the entre - preneurs are students, teachers or professors at the univer - sity. During that time, they are involved in the university or  in activities related to it on a daily basis. Consequently, they  have the opportunity to meet some of the contacts who are  part of the university´s network, and to interact with them.  During immersion as a university member, entrepreneurs  build their technological network, essentially composed of  members from inside the university circles (e.g. classmates’  contacts, professors and university students, and research  laboratories). Immersion as incubatees Immersion in the university´s network of relationships con - tinues when the venture begins to receive support from the  university´s business incubator. In some cases, support be - gins even before the nascent venture enters the incubator.  With this initial support, the entrepreneur begins to benefit  progressively from the new incubator environment, and is  able to interact with its contacts. Proximity to the incubator  and to its contacts is enhanced when the nascent venture  begins to be physically incubated inside the incubator. In the incubator, entrepreneurs share the same space with  incubator staff and other incubated entrepreneurs. In addi - tion, the incubator may be visited by foreign contacts, mainly  support contacts such as consultants. Entrepreneurs also  have the opportunity to get in touch with the incubator’s  institutional contacts inside the university, including research  laboratories and the technology transfer office.  As far as
the university, including research  laboratories and the technology transfer office.  As far as the university’s resources and contacts are con - cerned, affiliation makes it easier for the entrepreneurs to  use the university’s structure, and especially its technological  resources (researchers and laboratories) and its new ven - ture creation support system, primarily the business incuba - tor inside the university As far as contacts outside the university are concerned,  some funding offers from government agencies that support  innovation are reserved exclusively for ventures installed in  university incubators. The nature and contributions of the  affiliation factor are summarized in Table 5. Second contribution mechanism: Entrepreneurs´  immersion in the university´s network of relation - ships. In current language, the word immersion is used among  other things to describe the introduction of an object into  a container full of liquid, where it will be surrounded by that  liquid. Figuratively, it could be said that a university is an en - vironment full of contacts and that entrepreneurs, as they  progress though their university years, are immersed in that  environment. Immersion brings them physically closer to the  university´s network of relationships, allowing them to meet  and interact with those contacts, as pointed out by an entre - preneur from one of the cases studied: The incubator was located inside the T.I. Center, [...] there were  many contacts, it was easy to find labour for the venture, because  you were there, you see [...]. Even if it’s not your intention, you  make contacts when you are there.  (Case Games) As illustrated by Figure 1, some of these contacts are part  of the university and incubator structure (contacts located  inside the two circles), while others come from outside the  university (contacts located outside the big circle). Table 5. Summary of the affiliation mechanism.Nature of affiliationContribution of affiliation to
Table 5. Summary of the affiliation mechanism.Nature of affiliationContribution of affiliation to the development of the  entrepreneur´s social capital   The status of university member held by  entrepreneurs while they are incubated or are university  members.   It lends credibility to the entrepreneurs´ project.  It helps them to open doors and to convince contacts,  especially business and financing contacts, that their  venture project and technology are credible.    It gives entrepreneurs preferential access to  certain contacts and resources: technological resources  and internal support within the university; financial  resources outside it.
28ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1  ResearchersProfessors LaboratoriesStudents EOthers Others Brazilian  research and innovation funding agencies Business partners in  research programs Entrepreneur Contacts belonging to the  university's structureLegend: E University external contacts which the entrepreneurs usually meet at universityIncubator staffIncubator directorIncubated entrepreneurs CNPq *Sebrae Consultants OthersAssociate companiesCommunications officeTechnology - transfer office Legal support office OthersResearch centers Universities Finep * Business partners in  training programs OthersService suppliersUniversity Incubator ETechnological network Support network Business network Financial network * Brazilian research and innovation financing agenciesResearchersProfessors LaboratoriesStudents EOthers Others Brazilian  research and innovation  funding agencies Business partners in  research programs Entrepreneur Contacts belonging to the  university's structureLegend: E University external contacts which the entrepreneurs usually meet at universityIncubator staffIncubator directorIncubated entrepreneurs CNPq *Sebrae Consultants OthersAssociate companiesCommunications officeTechnology - transfer office Legal support office OthersResearch centers Universities Finep * Business partners in  training programs OthersService suppliersUniversity Incubator ETechnological network Support network Business network Financial network * Brazilian research and innovation financing agencies Figure 1. Entrepreneurs´ immersion in the university´s network of relationships Table 6. Summary of the immersion mechanism.Nature of immersionImmersion contribution to the formation of  entrepreneurs´ social capital   The entrepreneur´s immersion in the  university´s network of relationships, first as a  university
The entrepreneur´s immersion in the  university´s network of relationships, first as a  university member, then as incubatee   Immersion as a university member begins  before the creation of the venture, when entrepreneurs  are university students, professors or researchers   Immersion as an incubatee happens during the  venture creation process, when entrepreneurs receive  support from the university´s business incubator.   Immersion provides opportunities for meetings  and brings entrepreneurs into proximity with the  university’s network of contacts and structure.    During immersion as university members,  entrepreneurs mainly develop a network of  technological contacts    During immersion as incubatees, they develop  their support network.
29ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 Preparation helps to form social capital in different ways.  First, it provides entrepreneurs with meeting opportunities.  Second, support staff act as middlemen between entrepre - neurs and other contacts. Third, preparation helps entrepre - neurs to develop their social and business skills. The creation of meeting opportunities With regard to the creation of meeting opportunities, the  support provided by the incubator allows the entrepreneur  to meet with other contacts. These contacts are mostly  the people and organizations that work to support nascent  ventures.  Examples include SEBRAE (the Brazilian small  business support agency), consultants and public funding  agencies. T o a lesser degree, the incubator´s support also  provides opportunities to meet financial contacts from the  private sector, such as venture capitalists and others. The fol - lowing citation by an entrepreneur describes how a training  session at the incubator can help to develop social capital: We had a management course here at the incubator. The course  was offered by SEBRAE and was attended by some people from Table 6 presents a summary of the immersion mechanism  and its contributions to the social capital of academic en - trepreneurs. Third contribution mechanism: Preparation The third contribution mechanism is preparation, which re - fers to the help and support given to entrepreneurs by the  university – in other words, venture creation preparation  for the entrepreneur and the university´s support for the  initial steps of the nascent venture.  Examples include cours - es, consulting sessions and organization or support of the  entrepreneur´s attendance at events, shows and exhibitions.    These support activities are mainly carried out by the in - cubator, but may sometimes be
These support activities are mainly carried out by the in - cubator, but may sometimes be promoted by other univer - sity departments too.  An example of this latter possibil - ity would be activities aimed at enhancing the value of new  venture creation as a potential career path. Activities such  as these take place in entrepreneurship courses and other  events where students are able to meet with successful   entrepreneurs.  E Mentor Entrepreneur Entrepreneur's contactLegend: ENew contacts that belongs to  entrepreneur's contact networkTechnological network Support network Business network Financial networkIncubator director Consultant E Mentor Entrepreneur Entrepreneur's contactLegend: ENew contacts that belongs to  entrepreneur's contact networkTechnological network Support network Business network Financial networkIncubator director Consultant Figure 2. Support contacts as middlemen in the relationship with other contacts
30ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 the middleman role played by support employees between  entrepreneurs and other contacts. The development of social and business skills The third contribution of preparation to social capital is the  development of the entrepreneur’s social and business skills. With regard to social skills, the courses or consulting ses - sions offered to entrepreneurs by the university or the in - cubator contribute to the development of their communi - cation skills and their relationships with other individuals  (Albornoz, 2008). Social skills, as demonstrated by Baron  (2004) and Baron and Markman (2003), help entrepreneurs  to use their social capital. In addition to traditional courses and consulting sessions,  some incubators offer support activities focused on the de - velopment of social skills. For example, in the case of Web - design, a psychologist from the incubator offers individual or  group activities to the entrepreneurs in order to help them  improve the quality of their relationships with other people  inside or outside the incubator. Business skills can help entrepreneurs to create their social  capital in two different ways. First, by developing their busi - ness skills, entrepreneurs can better estimate their need for  social capital and find the best way to use it.   Second, business skills help entrepreneurs to develop their  cognitive proximity to business contacts. The way academic  entrepreneurs think at the beginning of the new venture  creation process is essentially connected to the technologi - cal world in which they live. As they develop their business  skills, however, they begin to understand the business sector  itself, the interactions between the actors working in that  sector, and the language they use to communicate.State public financial
the actors working in that  sector, and the language they use to communicate.State public financial agencies. And so we began to talk to them,  and got know them. If we need a loan someday, we can look  to someone we already met. It´s easier to talk to someone you  already know. (Imagem) Entrepreneurs have the chance to meet these contacts  because the incubator hires them to teach preparatory  courses or give consulting sessions. Other contacts are also  invited to take part in courses or events organized by the  incubator. Lastly, there are the contacts that entrepreneurs  meet at events held outside the university, which they at - tend with the incubator´s help (for example, attendance at  trade shows where entrepreneurs have a chance to meet  potential clients). Support people who act as middlemen between en - trepreneurs and other contacts The second contribution of preparation to social capital  is derived from the liaison role played by support staff be - tween entrepreneurs and other contacts. Depending on the entrepreneurs´ needs, the incubator em - ployees try to find people and organizations able to respond  adequately to those needs. They identify contacts and pave  the entrepreneur´s access to them.  Both the incubator and  the university introduce entrepreneurs to investors or cli - ents who come to the university looking for service or in - vestment opportunities. The role of middlemen between entrepreneurs and other  contacts is mainly played by the people closest to the en - trepreneurs, usually the incubator’s director, but possibly  other incubator staff, consultants and, to a lesser degree,  mentors and tutors. These people usually have contacts that  will be useful to entrepreneurs and they use their credibility  to pave the way for the entrepreneurs.  Figure 2 illustrates  Table 7. Summary of preparation mechanism.Nature of preparationContribution of preparation to the formation of  entrepreneurs´ social capital    University and incubator
of preparation to the formation of  entrepreneurs´ social capital    University and incubator follow-up and  support given to the entrepreneur   Occurs during entrepreneurship courses,  consulting sessions and other support and  validation activities for entrepreneurship.    The entrepreneur´s preparation may  begin even before admission to incubation, but  happens mostly during the incubation.  Offers meeting opportunities for entrepreneurs.    Support staff act as middlemen between entrepreneurs  and other contacts.    Preparation helps entrepreneurs to develop social and  business skills.   Preparation helps entrepreneurs to develop their support  and financial networks. To a lesser degree, it also helps them to  develop their business networks.
31ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 that the college environment in which the entrepreneurs  are immersed is constituted primarily of technological con - tacts, with very few business contacts. As a result, in their  daily activities at the university, entrepreneurs hardly ever  meet business contacts. The possibility of obtaining this type  of contact in the college environment, of being close to it  and of interacting with it, is a key factor in establishing rela - tionships and using them for the benefit of the new venture  (Johannisson, 1998; T orres, 1998).   The second factor is that most incubator directors and  staff members have few, if any, contacts in the business sec - tor. Given that most of them come from academic circles,  their networks are composed mainly of technological, sup - port and funding contacts. A similar situation was observed  by T otterman and Sten (2005) and Chabaud, Ehlinger and  Perret (2003). These authors studied incubators in Finland  and France respectively. Incubator directors and other staff  members are essential to the development of entrepre - neurs´ networks. They are important middlemen between  the entrepreneurs and other networks. T o increase the  chances of entrepreneurs developing a business network,  universities should hire support staff with better connec - tions in the business sector. The third factor that hinders the contribution of the spin-off  process to the creation of networks is that there are very  few activities focusing specifically on the development of so - cial capital (e.g. training sessions on social skills and network - ing). A study of 169 incubators carried out by Hansen et al.  (2000) found that only 26% of the sample actually offered  services focused specifically on network development. This  impoverished supply of social
offered  services focused specifically on network development. This  impoverished supply of social capital development activities  is contrary to the recommendations of many authors, who  have emphasized that spin-off support services, including in - cubation, should give priority to the creation of networks  (Carayannis and von Zedtwitz, 2005; Hansen et al., 2000;  Hughes, Ireland, and Morgan, 2007; Hussler and Ronde, 2009;  T otterman and Sten, 2005; Walter, Auer and Ritter, 2006). In short, if universities wish to improve the contribution of  the spin-off process to the development of academic entre - preneur’s social capital, they should increase the number of  business contacts in their environments, hire people with  connections in the business sector to support nascent en - trepreneurs, and provide entrepreneurs with more struc - tured services aiming at developing their social capital.The development of this cognitive proximity with the busi - ness world is significant because one of the factors that fa - vours the mobilization of social capital is cognitive proximity  to the contacts one wishes to use (T orres, 1998, 2007). Table  7 summarizes the preparation mechanism and its contribu - tions to social capital. Discussion and conclusion T o look at how the spin-off process contributes to the de - velopment of academic entrepreneur’s social capital, we car - ried out an inductive, exploratory and qualitative multi-case  study (Yin, 2003) in which we analyzed eight Brazilian aca - demic spin-off cases. We proposed three mechanisms to explain the contribu - tion of the spin-off process to the development of academic  entrepreneurs´ social capital, namely (i) affiliation, (ii) immer - sion and (iii) preparation – in other words, the entrepre - neurs´ affiliation with a university, their immersion in the  university´s network of relationships and the venture crea - tion preparation offered to entrepreneurs by the university. Through these mechanisms, the
crea - tion preparation offered to entrepreneurs by the university. Through these mechanisms, the spin-off process provides  the entrepreneurs with certain opportunities and privileges  in the development of social capital. First, it gives them pref - erential access to certain resources and contacts. Second, it  lends credibility to their ventures. Third, it provides meeting  opportunities for entrepreneurs and brings them into prox - imity with other actors. Fourth, it helps to develop entrepre - neurs´ social and business skills, and these skills, in turn, help  them to use contacts for the benefit of the nascent venture. Our findings are consistent with the opinions of other au - thors who indicate that the spin-off process can favour the  development of entrepreneurs´ social capital (Filion, Luc and  Fortin, 2003; Grandi and Grimaldi, 2003; Shane, 2004; T otter - man and Sten, 2005). However, it is also possible to find au - thors in the literature who found that university incubators  and other university support mechanisms for entrepreneurs  do not necessarily make it easier for academic entrepre - neurs to transition from a mostly technological network to  a business network (Chabaud, Ehlinger, and Perret, 2003; Ka - rim and Sammut, 2007; T otterman and Sten, 2005). In fact, when analyzing the case studies, we realized that the  universities and their business incubators contribute signifi - cantly to the constitution of technological, support, and fi - nancial networks, but much less to the development of busi - ness networks – precisely the kind of networks that are  fundamental to the success of the new venture. Three factors may explain why the spin-off process fails to  develop a significant business network. The first factor is
32ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 CARAYANNIS, E. G.,  von Zedtwitz, M. (2005). Architect - ing gloCal (global-local), real-virtual incubator networks (G- RVINs) as catalysts and accelerators of entrepreneurship in  transitioning and developing economies: lessons learned and  best practices from current development and business incu - bation practices. T echnovation, 25(2), 95-110.  CHABAUD, D., Ehlinger, S., Perret, V. (2003). Les incubateurs  d’entreprises innovantes: un réseau entrepreneurial re - configuré? Paper presented at the XIIème Conférence de  l’Association International de Management Stratégique, Les  côtes de Carthage.  CHANDRA, A., Silva, M. (2012). Business Incubation in Chile:  Development, Financing and Financial Services. Journal of  T echnology Management & Innovation, 7(2), 1-13. CLARYSSE, B., Wright, M., de Velde, E. (2011). Entrepreneurial  Origin, T echnological Knowledge, and the Growth of Spin- Off Companies. Journal of Management Studies, 48(6), 1420- 1442. COOPER, A. C., Dailly, C. M. (1997). Entrepreneurial T eams.  In: Sexton, D., Smilor, R. W. (Eds.), Entrepreneurship 2000.  Upstart, Chicago. pp. 167-188 DAVIDSSON, P ., Honig, B. (2003). The role of social and hu - man capital among nascent entrepreneurs. Journal of Busi - ness Venturing, 18(3), 301-331.  DELMAR, F . Shane, S. (2003). Does business planning facili - tate the development of new ventures? Strategic Manage - ment Journal, 24(12), 1165-1185. DUBINI, P ., Aldrich, H. (1991). Personal and extended net - works are central to the entrepreneurial process. Journal of  Business Venturing, 6(5), 305-313.  EISENHARDT, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case  study research. Academy of Management Review,  14(4),  532-550. FERRARO, F . (2003). Raising capital: Relational practices and  social capital in Silicon
532-550. FERRARO, F . (2003). Raising capital: Relational practices and  social capital in Silicon Valley entrepreneurship. Unpublished  Ph.D. Thesis, Stanford University, United States -- California.  FILION, L. J., Luc, D., Fortin, P .A. (2003). L’essaimage  d’entreprises - Vers de nouvelles pratiques entrepreneuri - ales. Les Éditions Transcontinental, Montreal.  FRANKLIN, S., Wright, M. (2000). University spin-out com - panies: academic and surrogate entrepreneurs. In: During, W.,  Oakey, R. P ., Kipling, M. (Eds.), New T echnology-Based Firms  at the T urn of the Century. Pergamon, Amsterdam. pp. 35-49.References ADLER, P . S., Kwon, S. W. (2002). Social capital: prospects for  a new concept. Academy of Management Review, 27(1), 17- 40.  ALBORNOZ, C. (2008). T oward a Set of Trainable Content  on Entrepreneurship Education: A Review of Entrepreneur - ship Research from an Educational Perspective. Journal of  T echnology Management & Innovation, 3(2), 86-98. ALDRICH, H., Carter, N. M. (2004). Social networks. In:  Gartner, W. B., Shaver, K. G., Carter, N. M., Reynolds, P . D.  (Eds.), Handbook of entrepreneurial dynamics: the process  of business creation. Sage, Thousand Oaks. pp. 324-335. ALDRICH, H., Rosen, B., Woodward, W. (1987). The impact  of social networks on business foundings and profit: a longi - tudinal study. In: Churchill, N. C., Hornaday, J. A., Kirchhoff, B.,  A., Krasner, J., Vesper, K. H. (Eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneur - ship Research 1987. Babson College, Wellesley. pp. 154-168. ALDRICH, H., Zimmer, C. (1986). Entrepreneurship through  social networks. In: Sexton, D. L., Smilor, R. W. (Eds.), The Art  and science of entrepreneurship. Ballinger, Cambridge. pp.  3-23. ANDERSON, A.; Park, J.; Jack, S. (2007) Entrepreneurial So - cial Capital: Conceptualizing Social Capital in New High-tech  Firms. International Small Business Journal, 25(3), 245-269.  AUDRETSCH D., Aldridge T., Sanders M. (2011), Social Capi - tal Building and New Business
245-269.  AUDRETSCH D., Aldridge T., Sanders M. (2011), Social Capi - tal Building and New Business Formation: A Case Study in  Silicon Valley, International Small Business Journal, 29(2) 152- 169. BARON, R. A. (2004). Social skills. In: Gartner, W. B., Shaver, K.  G., Carter, N. M., Reynolds, P . D. (Eds.), Handbook of entre - preneurial dynamics: the process of business creation. Sage,  Thousand Oaks. pp. 220-233. BARON, R. A.,  Markman, G. D. (2003). Beyond social capital:  the role of entrepreneurs’ social competence in their finan - cial success. Journal of Business Venturing, 18(1), 41-60.  BIRLEY, S. (1985). The role of networks in the entrepreneuri - al process. Journal of Business Venturing, 1(1), 107-117.  BOURDIEU, P . (1986). The forms of capital. In: Richardson, J.  G. (Ed.), Handbook of theory and research for the sociology  of education. Greenwood Press, Westport. pp. 241-258.
33ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 JOHANNISSON, B., Ramirez-Pasillas, M.,  Karlsson, G.  (2002). The institutional embeddedness of local inter-firm  networks: A leverage for business creation. Entrepreneur - ship and Regional Development, 14(4), 297-315.  JULIEN, P .A. (2000). L’entrepreneuriat au Québec - Pour une  révolution tranquille entrepreneurial 1980-2005. Les Édi - tions Transcontinental, Montreal.  KARIM, M.,  Sammut, S. (2007). Processus entrepreneurial et  pépinières d’entreprises: quand l’accompagnement conduit  à l’isolement. Paper presented at the XVIème Conférence  de l’Association Internationale de Management Stratégique,  Montréal.  KIM, P . H.,  Aldrich, H. E. (2005). Social capital and entrepre - neurship. Now, Boston.  LECHNER, C., Dowling, M. (2003). Firm networks: external  relationships as sources for the growth and competitiveness  of entrepreneurial firms. Entrepreneurship and Regional De - velopment, 15(1), 1-26.  LEMIEUX, V.,  Ouimet, M. (2004). L’analyse structurale des  réseaux sociaux. Presses de l’Université Laval, Québec.  LIAO, J.,  Welsch, H. (2002). The temporal patterns of ven - ture creation process: an exploratory study In: Bygrave, W.  D., Brush, C. G., Davidsson, P ., Fiet, J., Greene, P . G., Harrison,  R. T., Lerner, M., Meyer, G. D., Sohl, J., Zacharakis, A. (Eds.),  Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 2002. Babson Col - lege, Wellesley.  MEYER, M. (2003). Academic entrepreneurs or entrepre - neurial academics?  Research-based ventures and public sup - port mechanisms. R&D Management, 33(2), 107-115.  MIAN, S. A. (1996). Assessing value-added contributions of  university technology business incubators to tenant firms.  Research Policy, 25(3), 325-335.  MILES, M. B., Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analy - sis: an expanded sourcebook (2nd ed.).
M. B., Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analy - sis: an expanded sourcebook (2nd ed.). Sage, Thousand Oaks.  MURRAY, F . (2004). The role of academic inventors in entre - preneurial firms: sharing the laboratory life. Research Policy,  33(4), 643-659.  NEERGAARD, H. (2005). Networking activities in technolo - gy-based entrepreneurial teams. International Small Business  Journal, 23(3), 257-278.  NEERGAARD, H., Madsen, H. (2004). Knowledge intensive  entrepreneurship in a social capital perspective. Journal of  Enterprising Culture, 12(2), 105-125. FREITAS, J., Gonçalves, C., Cheng, L., Muniz, R. (2011). Par - simonious Determinants of Pre-Incubated Academic Spin- Offs Initial Performance: a Configurational Perspective. Jour - nal of T echnology Management & Innovation, 6(2), 50-65. GRANDI, A., Grimaldi, R. (2003). Exploring the networking  characteristics of new venture founding teams. Small Busi - ness Economics, 21(4), 329-341.  GRIMALDI, R., Grandi, A. (2005). Business incubators and  new venture creation: an assessment of incubating models.  T echnovation, 25(2), 111-121.  HANSEN, E. L. (2000). Resource acquisition as a startup pro - cess: initial stocks of social capital and organizational found - ings. In: Reynolds, P . D., Autio, E., Brush, C. G., Bygrave, W. D.,  Manigart, S., Sapienza, H. J., Shaver, K. G. (Eds.), Frontiers of  Entrepreneurship Research 2000. Babson College, Wellesley.  HANSEN, M. T., Chesbrough, H. W., Nohria, N.,  Sull, D. N.  (2000). Networked incubators: Hothouses of the new econ - omy. Harvard Business Review, 78(5), 74-84.  HILL, J., McGowan, P ., Drummond, P . (1999). The develop - ment and application of a qualitative approach to research - ing the marketing networks of small firm entrepreneurs.  Qualitative Market Research, 2(2), 71-81.  HITE, J. M. (2003). Patterns of multidimensionality among  embedded network ties: a typology of relational embedded - ness in emerging entrepreneurial firms. Strategic Organiza - tion,
of relational embedded - ness in emerging entrepreneurial firms. Strategic Organiza - tion, 1(1), 9-49.  HUGHES, M., Ireland, R. D., Morgan, R. E. (2007). Stimulating  Dynamic Value: Social Capital and Business Incubation as a  Pathway to Competitive Success. Long Range Planning, 40(2),  154-177.  HUSSLER, C., Ronde, P . (2009). Investing in Networking  Competences or Establishing in Hot Spots?. The Innovation  Dilemna. Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation,  4(4), 1-13. JOHANNISSON, B. (1996). The dynamics of entrepreneurial  networks. In: Reynolds, P . D., Birley, S. J., Butler, E., Bygrave, W.  D., Davidsson, P ., Gartner, W. B., McDougall, P . P . (Eds.), Fron - tiers of Entrepreneurship Research 1996. Babson College,  Wellesley. pp. 253-267. JOHANNISSON, B. (1998). Personal networks in emerging  knowledge-based firms: Spatial and functional patterns. En - trepreneurship & Regional Development, 10(4), 297-312.
34ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 UZZI, B. (1996). The sources and consequences of embed - dedness for the economic performance of organizations:  the network effect. American Sociological Review, 61(4),  674-698.  UZUNCA, B. (2011). Comparative Advantages of Spinoff  Firms: An Evolutionary Perspective. Journal of T echnology  Management & Innovation, 6(4), 80-92. VERSIANI, A., Guimaraes, L. (2006). Creation of technologi - cally-based firms in Brazil: the influence of incubators on the  set-up of new business. Revista Eletrônica de Administração,  12(3), 1-23.  WALTER, A., Auer, M., Ritter, T. (2006). The impact of net - work capabilities and entrepreneurial orientation on uni - versity spin-off performance. Journal of Business Venturing,  21(4), 541-567.  WOLFFENBÜTTEL, A., Fracasso, E., Bignetti, L. (2004). The  university-firms interaction process in a university incuba - tor: the case of the Vale do Rio dos Sinos University’s incu - bator Revista Eletrônica de Administração, 10(1), 1-19.  YIN, R. K. (2003). Case study research: design and methods  (3rd ed.). Sage, Thousand Oaks. NICOLAOU, N., Birley, S. (2003). Academic networks in a  trichotomous categorisation of university spinouts. Journal  of Business Venturing, 18(3), 333-359.  ORGANISATION de coopération et de développement  économiques - OCDE. (2001). Special issue on fostering  high-tech spin-offs: a public strategy for Innovation. Organi - sation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris.  PATTON, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation  methods (3rd ed.). Sage, Thousand Oaks.  PEREZ, M. P ., & Sanchez, A. M. (2003). The development of  university spin-offs: early dynamics of technology transfer  and networking. T echnovation, 23(10), 823-831.  PIRNAY, F . (2001). La valorisation économique des résultats  de
T echnovation, 23(10), 823-831.  PIRNAY, F . (2001). La valorisation économique des résultats  de recherche universitaire par création d’activités nouvelles  (spin-offs universitaires): Propostion d’un cadre procedural  d’essaimage. Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, Université du Driot  et de la Santé - Lille 2.  PIRNAY, F ., Surlemont, B., Nlemvo, F . (2003). T oward a typol - ogy of university spin-offs. Small Business Economics, 21(4),  355-369.  RADOSEVICH, R. (1995). A model for entrepreneurial spin- offs from public technology sources. International Journal of  T echnology Management, 10(7/8), 879-893.  RASMUSSEN, E. (2011). Understanding Academic entre - preneurship: exploring the emergence of university spin-off  ventures using process theories. International Small Business  Journal, 29(5) 448–471 SHANE, S. (2004). Academic entrepreneurship: university  spinoffs and wealth creation. Elgar, Cheltenham.  STRAUSS, A. L., Corbin, J. M. (1998). Basics of qualitative re - search: techniques and procedures for developing grounded  theory (2nd ed.). Sage, Thousand Oaks.  TORRÈS, O. (1998). PME: de nouvelles approches. Econom - ica, Paris.  TORRÈS, O. (2007). Approche explicative du comportement  caractéristique des PME: le principe proxémique. In: Filion, L.  J. (Ed.), Management des PME - De la création à la croissance.  ERPI, Saint-Laurent. pp. 35-46 TOTTERMAN, H., Sten, J. (2005). Start-ups: business incuba - tion and social capital. International Small Business Journal,  23(5), 487511.
21ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.Received September 14, 2012 / Accepted Jan 20, 2013 J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 Spin-off Process and the Development of Academic Entrepreneur’s   Social Capital  Cândido Borges1, Louis Jacques Filion2 Abstract So far, there has been very little in-depth research on how the spin-off process contributes to the development of  academic entrepreneurs’ social capital. In this inductive, exploratory and qualitative study, we examine eight academic  entrepreneurship case studies. Based on our findings, we propose three mechanisms to explain the contribution of the spin- off process. They are the entrepreneurs´ affiliation with the university, the entrepreneurs´ immersion in the university´s  network of relationships, and the new venture creation preparation given to the entrepreneurs by the university. Keywords: academic entrepreneurship; entrepreneurship; incubators; networks; social capital; spin-offs; technological  entrepreneurship; university spin-offs. 1 Faculdade de Administração, Ciências Contábeis e Ciências Econômicas, Universidade Federal de Goiás, Caixa Postal 131, 74001-970 -  Goiânia-GO, Brasil. Phone: 55-62-32758497. email: candidoborges@gmail.com 2 Chaire d’entrepreneuriat Rogers-J.-A.-Bombardier, HEC Montréal, 3000 chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montréal (Québec) H3C  2A7, Canada. Phone: 1-514-340-6339. email: louisjacques.filion@hec.ca. (3)1019 borges
22ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 used and the fourth section presents and examines the find - ings. The fifth and last section summarizes and discusses the  main aspects of the research. Academic spin-offs and social capital This section presents the two main topics that form the  theoretical foundation for the study: (i) academic spin-offs  and (ii) the social capital of academic entrepreneurs. Academic spin-offs The term spin-off is used in the literature to refer to both  the outcome and the process that generates that outcome.  As a process, it refers to the fact that the new firm, or its  entrepreneurs, or the technology used in the new venture,  or all three, either left or were released by a pre-existing  organization, also called the mother organization. The result  of this process is a new venture, the spin-off. Basically, an academic spin-off occurs as follows: The entre - preneurs, during their activities as students, professors or  researchers at a university, acquire technological knowledge  or develop a new technology that will, in the future, be used  with the support of the university´s business incubator (or  another mechanism) to develop a product or a business con - cept that will be explored commercially by a new venture. The mother organization, the entrepreneurs and the tech - nology are the three key elements of a spin-off process (Fil - ion, Luc and Fortin, 2003; Meyer, 2003; Pirnay, Surlemont and  Nlemvo, 2003). In the case of academic spin-offs, the mother  organizations are traditionally universities, but in a broader  sense, all science and technology institutions can act as gen - erators of technological spin-offs (Freitas et al., 2011; Ras - mussen, 2011; Shane, 2004). Both the entrepreneur and the  technology that will be used as the foundation for the new  venture --- T echnovation, 23(10), 823-831.  PIRNAY, F . (2001). La valorisation économique des résultats  de recherche universitaire par création d’activités nouvelles  (spin-offs universitaires): Propostion d’un cadre procedural  d’essaimage. Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, Université du Driot  et de la Santé - Lille 2.  PIRNAY, F ., Surlemont, B., Nlemvo, F . (2003). T oward a typol - ogy of university spin-offs. Small Business Economics, 21(4),  355-369.  RADOSEVICH, R. (1995). A model for entrepreneurial spin- offs from public technology sources. International Journal of  T echnology Management, 10(7/8), 879-893.  RASMUSSEN, E. (2011). Understanding Academic entre - preneurship: exploring the emergence of university spin-off  ventures using process theories. International Small Business  Journal, 29(5) 448–471 SHANE, S. (2004). Academic entrepreneurship: university  spinoffs and wealth creation. Elgar, Cheltenham.  STRAUSS, A. L., Corbin, J. M. (1998). Basics of qualitative re - search: techniques and procedures for developing grounded  theory (2nd ed.). Sage, Thousand Oaks.  TORRÈS, O. (1998). PME: de nouvelles approches. Econom - ica, Paris.  TORRÈS, O. (2007). Approche explicative du comportement  caractéristique des PME: le principe proxémique. In: Filion, L.  J. (Ed.), Management des PME - De la création à la croissance.  ERPI, Saint-Laurent. pp. 35-46 TOTTERMAN, H., Sten, J. (2005). Start-ups: business incuba - tion and social capital. International Small Business Journal,  23(5), 487511.
Both the entrepreneur and the  technology that will be used as the foundation for the new  venture stem from the mother organization. The entrepre - neur usually works for or studies at it. The technology used  by the spin-off is taught, developed or improved by it. Universities, however, can also give other types of support  to the creation of new business ventures, beside the fact  that the entrepreneurs and the technology stem from them.  Examples include access to research laboratories, technol - ogy transfer offices, promotion of an entrepreneurial cul - ture within the university, financial help, consulting sessions  or courses in management and sales, office space for nas - cent ventures, and access to the university’s network of  relationships (Clarysse, Wright and de Velde, 2011; Meyer,  2003; OECD, 2001; Shane, 2004;). One of the main support  tools given by universities to the spin-off process is the busi - ness incubator, where many support services can be found  (Grimaldi and Grandi, 2005; Versiani and Guimarães, 2006;  Wolffenbüttel, Fracasso and  Bignetti, 2004).Introduction Research has shown that one of the factors that may con - tribute to the success of a new venture is the entrepreneur’s  social capital (Anderson, Park and Jack, 2007; Audretsch,  Aldridge and Sanders, 2011; Davidsson and Honig, 2003;  Kim and Aldrich, 2005; Neergaard and Madsen, 2004). Social  capital allows entrepreneurs to obtain resources that would  otherwise not be available to them at all, or would only be  available at a much higher cost in terms of time, money and  effort. Given the significance of social capital to entrepreneurs, re - searchers have examined its features, how it develops and  how it is used to benefit a nascent venture. Studies to date  have shown that the initial social capital of entrepreneurs  (Liao and Welsch, 2002; Murray, 2004), as well as their social  skills (Baron, 2004; Baron and Markman, 2003) and their net - working efforts (Bourdieu, 1986;
skills (Baron, 2004; Baron and Markman, 2003) and their net - working efforts (Bourdieu, 1986; Ferraro, 2003), are all key  elements in its development. All these studies, however, were limited by one specific fac - tor, namely that they focused on the creation of traditional  businesses without the support of a mother organization.  This is clearly not the context for academic spin-offs, which  are technological ventures born inside a mother organiza - tion (the university) and which receive a range of support  from that organization. Some of the social capital developed  by academic entrepreneurs results from the spin-off pro - cess. This is due to the fact that the university, with its net - work of connections, its credibility and its support structure,  is able help its entrepreneurs to develop new contacts and  expand their social capital (Chandra and Silva, 2012; Grandi  and  Grimaldi, 2003; Hughes, Ireland and Morgan, 2007; Mian,  1996; Shane, 2004; T otterman and Sten, 2005; Uzunca, 2011). Despite this, there has been very little in-depth research  into how the spin-off process contributes to the develop - ment of academic entrepreneur’s social capital. This paper  presents an inductive, exploratory and qualitative study that  was designed to address this gap in current knowledge. Eight academic entrepreneurship case studies, chosen on  the basis of maximum variation criteria (Patton, 2002), were  examined. Maximum variation was guaranteed by the key el - ements in the spin-off process: the mother organization (the  university), the entrepreneurs and the technology. The study  itself was based on the following research question: How  does the spin-off process contribute to the development of  academic entrepreneur’s social capital? This introduction constitutes the first part of the paper. The  second part presents the theoretical references used for the  research, while the third section describes the methodology --- crea - tion preparation offered to entrepreneurs by the university. Through these mechanisms, the spin-off process provides  the entrepreneurs with certain opportunities and privileges  in the development of social capital. First, it gives them pref - erential access to certain resources and contacts. Second, it  lends credibility to their ventures. Third, it provides meeting  opportunities for entrepreneurs and brings them into prox - imity with other actors. Fourth, it helps to develop entrepre - neurs´ social and business skills, and these skills, in turn, help  them to use contacts for the benefit of the nascent venture. Our findings are consistent with the opinions of other au - thors who indicate that the spin-off process can favour the  development of entrepreneurs´ social capital (Filion, Luc and  Fortin, 2003; Grandi and Grimaldi, 2003; Shane, 2004; T otter - man and Sten, 2005). However, it is also possible to find au - thors in the literature who found that university incubators  and other university support mechanisms for entrepreneurs  do not necessarily make it easier for academic entrepre - neurs to transition from a mostly technological network to  a business network (Chabaud, Ehlinger, and Perret, 2003; Ka - rim and Sammut, 2007; T otterman and Sten, 2005). In fact, when analyzing the case studies, we realized that the  universities and their business incubators contribute signifi - cantly to the constitution of technological, support, and fi - nancial networks, but much less to the development of busi - ness networks – precisely the kind of networks that are  fundamental to the success of the new venture. Three factors may explain why the spin-off process fails to  develop a significant business network. The first factor is
23ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 more demanding in terms of the resources needed (Pirnay,  Surlemont  and Nlemvo, 2003). In their typology, Pirnay, Surlemont and Nlemvo (2003) con - sider only cases where the technologies in question stem  from the university. They may be codified or tacit technol - ogies, developed or learned at the university. However, in  some cases the technology may originate from an organiza - tion other than the university or may even be hybrid, for  example when the spin-off utilizes technology developed  outside the university, but adds the university’s own techno - logical knowledge to it. Academic entrepreneur’s social capital Adler and Kwon (2002) identified two mains standpoints or  perspectives used by researchers working on the concept of  social capital: (i) the external perspective, where the study  focuses on the external relationships of one actor; and (ii)  the internal perspective, which focuses on the internal rela - tionships of a group within the community. In this particular  study, we adopt the former perspective, focusing our atten - tion on the entrepreneur’s network of contacts. A contact is  an actor with whom the focal actor (or entrepreneur) has a  direct connection (Lemineux and Ouimet, 2004). A contact  may be an individual or an organization. Table 1 shows the  main contacts of academic entrepreneurs. These contacts can be classified or grouped according to  the role they play or the resources they make available to  the entrepreneurs (Johannisson, Ramirez-Pasillas and Karls - son, 2002; Julien, 2000; Lechner and Dowling, 2003). Exam - ples would include the moral support network (usually fam - ily and friends), the technological network (researchers and  the university), and the business network (customers, sup - pliers).  A contact may be both --- 28ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1  ResearchersProfessors LaboratoriesStudents EOthers Others Brazilian  research and innovation funding agencies Business partners in  research programs Entrepreneur Contacts belonging to the  university's structureLegend: E University external contacts which the entrepreneurs usually meet at universityIncubator staffIncubator directorIncubated entrepreneurs CNPq *Sebrae Consultants OthersAssociate companiesCommunications officeTechnology - transfer office Legal support office OthersResearch centers Universities Finep * Business partners in  training programs OthersService suppliersUniversity Incubator ETechnological network Support network Business network Financial network * Brazilian research and innovation financing agenciesResearchersProfessors LaboratoriesStudents EOthers Others Brazilian  research and innovation  funding agencies Business partners in  research programs Entrepreneur Contacts belonging to the  university's structureLegend: E University external contacts which the entrepreneurs usually meet at universityIncubator staffIncubator directorIncubated entrepreneurs CNPq *Sebrae Consultants OthersAssociate companiesCommunications officeTechnology - transfer office Legal support office OthersResearch centers Universities Finep * Business partners in  training programs OthersService suppliersUniversity Incubator ETechnological network Support network Business network Financial network * Brazilian research and innovation financing agencies Figure 1. Entrepreneurs´ immersion in the university´s network of relationships Table 6. Summary of the immersion mechanism.Nature of immersionImmersion contribution to the formation of  entrepreneurs´ social capital   The entrepreneur´s immersion in the  university´s network of relationships, first as a  university
and  the university), and the business network (customers, sup - pliers).  A contact may be both a friend and a customer, or a The second key component for the spin-off process is the  entrepreneur. University spin-off entrepreneurs are usually  professors, researchers, or undergraduate or graduate stu - dents (Nicolaou and Birley, 2003). They may or may not leave  the university after the new business venture is created.  Many of them lead a double professional life, combining aca - demic activities at the university with business activities in  the new venture. However, it is also possible for a spin-off to  be created by a surrogate entrepreneur (Radosevich, 1995). In this case, the mother organization transfers the technol - ogy or provides support for the creation of the new venture,  but the entrepreneur comes from outside the university. The  surrogate entrepreneur can start the new venture alone or  can build a partnership with the university’s researchers,  professors or students (Franklin and Wright, 2000). Most technological ventures, spin-offs included, are created  by a team of entrepreneurs as opposed to a single entrepre - neur (Cooper and Dailly, 1997; Neergaard, 2005). In the case  of academic spin-offs, these teams, rather than being com - posed of people from one category (professors, students or  outsiders), are often made up of entrepreneurs from differ - ent categories. As a result, professors and students may well  be part of the same team (Nicolau and Birley, 2003). The third component in the spin-off process is the nature  of the technology to be transferred to the new venture by  the university. According to Pirnay, Surlemont and Nlemvo  (2003), the knowledge transferred to a spin-off can be clas - sified into two main groups: tacit and codified. Tacit knowl - edge is associated with individuals, and it is more personal,  gathered over the years through experience and academic  activities. In contrast, codified knowledge may belong to the
through experience and academic  activities. In contrast, codified knowledge may belong to the  university and be protected by a patent. The creation of a  spin-off with patented technology is usually lengthier and  Family members Friends University University members Professors and researchers Research institutions PartnersCustomers Suppliers Banks Venture capitalists Other actors in the financial sector Consultants AccountantsOther entrepreneurs Organizations supporting  entrepreneurship Government agencies Professional and business associations Table 1. Main contacts of academic entrepreneurs. Sources: Aldrich and Zimmer (1986), Birley (1985), Dubini and Aldrich (1991), Hill,  McGowan and Drummond (1999), Julien (2000), Pirnay (2001).
24ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 benefit the entrepreneur.  An increase in benefit only occurs  as the contacts themselves become more diverse in terms  of demographic traits, the resources they bring and the net - works to which they belong (Aldrich and Carter, 2004; Al - drich, Rosen and Woodward, 1987). Methods The study presented in this paper was inductive, explora - tory and qualitative in nature. Eight university spin-off cases  were examined. The choice of this particular number of cas - es was the result of theoretical saturation (Eisenhardt, 1989;  Strauss and Corbin, 1998) during the codification and data  analysis phase. Table 2 below summarizes the methodologi - cal approach used in this research. The eight cases examined were drawn from different tech - nological fields and different Brazilian universities. The ven - tures themselves were founded between 2000 and 2003.  Table 3 provides additional information about the selected  cases. T o ensure confidentiality, the ventures´ names are fic - titious. All the cases were two to four-year-old spin-offs (at the time  of data collection) and were chosen to ensure what Patton  (2002) refers to as maximum variation. The key components  to the spin-off basis (entrepreneur, mother organization and  technology) were used to ensure the maximum variation  criterion. In the variation of the entrepreneur component, family member and an investor.  As a result, some contacts  may play two different roles in the entrepreneur’s network  (Hite, 2003; Johannisson, 1996; Uzzi, 1996). This is the case  when a friend who is a researcher provides the technologi - cal entrepreneur with both moral support and technological  information. Contacts are described as multiplex when they  play different roles or provide the entrepreneur with differ - ent resources
multiplex when they  play different roles or provide the entrepreneur with differ - ent resources (Kim and  Aldrich, 2005). The social capital of entrepreneurs tends to change in size  and in the diversity of the contacts in the network. In the  case of size, Hansen’s (2000) study of 52 new business ven - tures drawn from all economic sectors in the United States  showed that, as a new venture is created, the number of  contacts used by the entrepreneurs tends to grow. Hansen  divided the process into four phases and checked the num - ber of contacts in each phase.  He found that the number  of contacts increased as the process advanced: Phase 1 (7  contacts), Phase 2 (8 contacts), Phase 3 (11 contacts) and  Phase 4 (12 contacts). In the case of diversity, Perez and Sanchez (2003) in Spain  and Johannisson (1998) in Sweden studied academic spin- offs and concluded that a network composed initially of sci - entific contacts would gradually be transformed to include  business contacts. Diversity is important because the simple fact of having  more contacts in the network is not, of itself, sufficient to  Research method - Multiple case analysis (Eisenhardt, 1989; Yin, 2003) Number of cases - Eight  Criteria used in case choice- University spin-offs two to four years-old. - Maximum variation (Patton, 2002) in the key elements of spin-offs   (entrepreneur, mother organization and technology). Data collection- Semi-structured interviews, research notes and secondary data - 35 interviews (2 hours average): 22 with entrepreneurs/13 with managers and  other incubator staff Data analysis and  interpretation- Transcription of interviews - Interview codification and analysis with the help of the NVivo 2.0 software - Description file for each case - Analytical tables - Intra- and inter-case comparisons - Comparison with the literature Table 2. Summary of methodological procedures.
25ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 the incubators. In addition, all the ventures, universities and  incubators in the cases studied were visited and observed.  The interview guide was structured in order to identify the  characteristics of the contacts used to carry out the activi - ties involved in the creation of the venture, as well as the  origin of those contacts and the role played by the spin-off  process in establishing a relationship with the contact and  utilizing it. The interviews were transcribed and submitted to the inter - viewees for validation. They were then coded and analyzed  using the Nvivo 2.0 application. Contact categories were  created during the coding process, and categories were also  created to represent the contributions of the spin-off pro - cess to the entrepreneurs´ social capital. The contribution  categories were grouped together under three headings or  mechanisms: (i) affiliation, (ii) immersion and (iii) prepara - tion. They will be explained in more detail in the presenta - tion and analysis of the findings.the cases represent different types of entrepreneurs – stu - dents, professors and external entrepreneurs. In the varia - tion of the mother organization component, the selected  cases stemmed from universities and incubators that offered  different research and support structures for entrepreneur - ship.  The mother organizations in question ranged from  large universities with solid, respected structures to small  colleges with nascent structures. Finally, in the third com - ponent (technology), the technologies transferred to the  spin-offs by the universities included both tacit and coded  technologies. T o collect the data for the study, 35 semi-structured inter - views were conducted, lasting an average of two hours each.  Of the 35 interviews, 22 were
inter - views were conducted, lasting an average of two hours each.  Of the 35 interviews, 22 were with entrepreneurs and 13  with incubator employees (managers or other staff mem - bers). Secondary data sources (reports, advertising material,  articles and the Internet) were also used to collect informa - tion on the ventures, the entrepreneurs, the universities and  Table 3. Cases.Venture FoundationBusiness  Activity# of empCase variation in relation to key components in the  spin-off process Type of  entrepreneur*Type of mother  organization**Type of  technology Aprendiz 2003Communication  Software3 Surrogate (2) LowNot  patented Freeway 2003Software and  training13Students (1)  and surrogate  (3) AverageNot  patented Imagem 2003 Geoprocessing 0 Students (2) LowNot  patented Quimitech 2002Automated  systems for  chemical  analysis3Professors (3)  and researchers  (1)AveragePatented Games 2000 Computer games 6Students (3)  and surrogate  (1)HighNot  patented Sensores 2003 Optical sensors 45Professors (2)  and students  (3)HighPatented Visitech 2003Artificial vision  systems8 Students (2) HighNot  patented Webdesign 2002 Websites 2Students (2)  and surrogate  (1)LowNot  patented * -The numbers in brackets indicate the number of this type of entrepreneur among the venture creators.  ** - The classification patterns “high”, “average’ and “low” were defined by the researchers according to the research structure in the university  (number of labs, researchers and scientific production), its reputation and the services of fered to the entrepreneurs by its business incubator .
26ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 tacts that the nascent venture and the technology it uses are  credible. The nascent venture’s affiliation with the university  adds credibility and makes it easier to mobilize social capi - tal, as already demonstrated by Grandi and Grimaldi (2003),  Mian (1996) and T otterman and Sten (2005). The possibility of using the university´s credibility in early  attempts to establish a business relationship with a finance  provider, a customer or another contact is important to  nascent ventures because they still need to build their legiti - macy in the market (Delmar and Shane, 2003). This possibil - ity is especially important to young university entrepreneurs  who have few accomplishments to show when attempting  to attract or convince a new contact, as illustrated by this  citation from an entrepreneur: You are not just another a small company located wherever. You  can say you are located inside the university´s incubator, that  you have partners, that you have the university behind you, a  very strong name. [...]. We used this a lot to sell our projects. The  credibility of being in the university´s incubator was fundamental  (Visitech) T o explore affiliation, entrepreneurs connect their image to  that of the university. They mention their affiliation to their  contacts. They also mention it in the promotional material  they use, including leaflets and websites, where the logos of  the university and the incubator are displayed. However, not all universities enjoy the same reputation. The  fact of being incubated in a university that is well-known  for its research and technology transfer tends to lend more  credibility to the entrepreneur´s venture than if it had been  incubated in a small university that has not yet built its repu - tation. An affiliation that
been  incubated in a small university that has not yet built its repu - tation. An affiliation that gives entrepreneurs preferential access to   certain contacts The second contribution made by affiliation to the develop - ment of social capital is preferential access to contacts and  resources, mainly within the university, but also outside it.The contacts used by the entrepreneurs were classified ac - cording to the network category to which they belonged  (see the examples in Table 4). Where a contact was a multi - plex (i.e. performing many functions), it was classified by its  main function. The analysis procedure was supported and completed by  tools and techniques suggested by Miles and Huberman  (1994), and included a file containing the description of each  case, analytical tables and intra- and inter-case comparisons. Findings The spin-off process contributes to the development of aca - demic entrepreneurs´ social capital via three mechanisms,  namely (i) affiliation, (ii) immersion and (iii) preparation – in  other words, the entrepreneur’s affiliation with the universi - ty, the entrepreneur’s immersion in the university’s network  of relationships, and the new business venture preparation  given to the entrepreneur by the university. First contribution mechanism:  Entrepreneur´s affiliation with the university. With regard to the first mechanism, affiliation, academic en - trepreneurs are affiliated with their university, and are a part  of it. When the entrepreneurs are students, researchers or  university professors, the connection is academic in nature.  When incubated, the entrepreneurs install their nascent  venture inside the university’s incubator. This affiliation with  the university adds to the formation of the entrepreneurial  social capital because, first, it lends credibility to the entre - preneur’s project, and second, it gives the entrepreneurs  preferential access to certain contacts and resources.  These  two aspects will be examined
preferential access to certain contacts and resources.  These  two aspects will be examined in the following sub-sections. An affiliation that lends credibility to the entrepreneur’s ventures Because universities usually have good reputations in society,  academic entrepreneurs can lend credibility to their ven - tures by telling their contacts about their affiliation. Affili - ation helps them to open doors and convince certain con - Table 4. Contact classification.Category Examples Technological network Professors, students, laboratories Support network Incubator staff, consultants, SEBRAE (Brazilian small  business support agency) Financial network Credit agencies, banks, financial angels Business network Clients, suppliers, business partners Other Parents, other relatives --- Table 5. Summary of the affiliation mechanism.Nature of affiliationContribution of affiliation to the development of the  entrepreneur´s social capital   The status of university member held by  entrepreneurs while they are incubated or are university  members.   It lends credibility to the entrepreneurs´ project.  It helps them to open doors and to convince contacts,  especially business and financing contacts, that their  venture project and technology are credible.    It gives entrepreneurs preferential access to  certain contacts and resources: technological resources  and internal support within the university; financial  resources outside it.
27ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 Entrepreneurs go through two different types of immersion  in the university’s network, first as a university member and  second as an incubatee. Immersion as a university member Immersion as a university member occurs when the entre - preneurs are students, teachers or professors at the univer - sity. During that time, they are involved in the university or  in activities related to it on a daily basis. Consequently, they  have the opportunity to meet some of the contacts who are  part of the university´s network, and to interact with them.  During immersion as a university member, entrepreneurs  build their technological network, essentially composed of  members from inside the university circles (e.g. classmates’  contacts, professors and university students, and research  laboratories). Immersion as incubatees Immersion in the university´s network of relationships con - tinues when the venture begins to receive support from the  university´s business incubator. In some cases, support be - gins even before the nascent venture enters the incubator.  With this initial support, the entrepreneur begins to benefit  progressively from the new incubator environment, and is  able to interact with its contacts. Proximity to the incubator  and to its contacts is enhanced when the nascent venture  begins to be physically incubated inside the incubator. In the incubator, entrepreneurs share the same space with  incubator staff and other incubated entrepreneurs. In addi - tion, the incubator may be visited by foreign contacts, mainly  support contacts such as consultants. Entrepreneurs also  have the opportunity to get in touch with the incubator’s  institutional contacts inside the university, including research  laboratories and the technology transfer office.  As far as
the university, including research  laboratories and the technology transfer office.  As far as the university’s resources and contacts are con - cerned, affiliation makes it easier for the entrepreneurs to  use the university’s structure, and especially its technological  resources (researchers and laboratories) and its new ven - ture creation support system, primarily the business incuba - tor inside the university As far as contacts outside the university are concerned,  some funding offers from government agencies that support  innovation are reserved exclusively for ventures installed in  university incubators. The nature and contributions of the  affiliation factor are summarized in Table 5. Second contribution mechanism: Entrepreneurs´  immersion in the university´s network of relation - ships. In current language, the word immersion is used among  other things to describe the introduction of an object into  a container full of liquid, where it will be surrounded by that  liquid. Figuratively, it could be said that a university is an en - vironment full of contacts and that entrepreneurs, as they  progress though their university years, are immersed in that  environment. Immersion brings them physically closer to the  university´s network of relationships, allowing them to meet  and interact with those contacts, as pointed out by an entre - preneur from one of the cases studied: The incubator was located inside the T.I. Center, [...] there were  many contacts, it was easy to find labour for the venture, because  you were there, you see [...]. Even if it’s not your intention, you  make contacts when you are there.  (Case Games) As illustrated by Figure 1, some of these contacts are part  of the university and incubator structure (contacts located  inside the two circles), while others come from outside the  university (contacts located outside the big circle). Table 5. Summary of the affiliation mechanism.Nature of affiliationContribution of affiliation to
The entrepreneur´s immersion in the  university´s network of relationships, first as a  university member, then as incubatee   Immersion as a university member begins  before the creation of the venture, when entrepreneurs  are university students, professors or researchers   Immersion as an incubatee happens during the  venture creation process, when entrepreneurs receive  support from the university´s business incubator.   Immersion provides opportunities for meetings  and brings entrepreneurs into proximity with the  university’s network of contacts and structure.    During immersion as university members,  entrepreneurs mainly develop a network of  technological contacts    During immersion as incubatees, they develop  their support network.
29ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 Preparation helps to form social capital in different ways.  First, it provides entrepreneurs with meeting opportunities.  Second, support staff act as middlemen between entrepre - neurs and other contacts. Third, preparation helps entrepre - neurs to develop their social and business skills. The creation of meeting opportunities With regard to the creation of meeting opportunities, the  support provided by the incubator allows the entrepreneur  to meet with other contacts. These contacts are mostly  the people and organizations that work to support nascent  ventures.  Examples include SEBRAE (the Brazilian small  business support agency), consultants and public funding  agencies. T o a lesser degree, the incubator´s support also  provides opportunities to meet financial contacts from the  private sector, such as venture capitalists and others. The fol - lowing citation by an entrepreneur describes how a training  session at the incubator can help to develop social capital: We had a management course here at the incubator. The course  was offered by SEBRAE and was attended by some people from Table 6 presents a summary of the immersion mechanism  and its contributions to the social capital of academic en - trepreneurs. Third contribution mechanism: Preparation The third contribution mechanism is preparation, which re - fers to the help and support given to entrepreneurs by the  university – in other words, venture creation preparation  for the entrepreneur and the university´s support for the  initial steps of the nascent venture.  Examples include cours - es, consulting sessions and organization or support of the  entrepreneur´s attendance at events, shows and exhibitions.    These support activities are mainly carried out by the in - cubator, but may sometimes be
These support activities are mainly carried out by the in - cubator, but may sometimes be promoted by other univer - sity departments too.  An example of this latter possibil - ity would be activities aimed at enhancing the value of new  venture creation as a potential career path. Activities such  as these take place in entrepreneurship courses and other  events where students are able to meet with successful   entrepreneurs.  E Mentor Entrepreneur Entrepreneur's contactLegend: ENew contacts that belongs to  entrepreneur's contact networkTechnological network Support network Business network Financial networkIncubator director Consultant E Mentor Entrepreneur Entrepreneur's contactLegend: ENew contacts that belongs to  entrepreneur's contact networkTechnological network Support network Business network Financial networkIncubator director Consultant Figure 2. Support contacts as middlemen in the relationship with other contacts
30ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 the middleman role played by support employees between  entrepreneurs and other contacts. The development of social and business skills The third contribution of preparation to social capital is the  development of the entrepreneur’s social and business skills. With regard to social skills, the courses or consulting ses - sions offered to entrepreneurs by the university or the in - cubator contribute to the development of their communi - cation skills and their relationships with other individuals  (Albornoz, 2008). Social skills, as demonstrated by Baron  (2004) and Baron and Markman (2003), help entrepreneurs  to use their social capital. In addition to traditional courses and consulting sessions,  some incubators offer support activities focused on the de - velopment of social skills. For example, in the case of Web - design, a psychologist from the incubator offers individual or  group activities to the entrepreneurs in order to help them  improve the quality of their relationships with other people  inside or outside the incubator. Business skills can help entrepreneurs to create their social  capital in two different ways. First, by developing their busi - ness skills, entrepreneurs can better estimate their need for  social capital and find the best way to use it.   Second, business skills help entrepreneurs to develop their  cognitive proximity to business contacts. The way academic  entrepreneurs think at the beginning of the new venture  creation process is essentially connected to the technologi - cal world in which they live. As they develop their business  skills, however, they begin to understand the business sector  itself, the interactions between the actors working in that  sector, and the language they use to communicate.State public financial
the actors working in that  sector, and the language they use to communicate.State public financial agencies. And so we began to talk to them,  and got know them. If we need a loan someday, we can look  to someone we already met. It´s easier to talk to someone you  already know. (Imagem) Entrepreneurs have the chance to meet these contacts  because the incubator hires them to teach preparatory  courses or give consulting sessions. Other contacts are also  invited to take part in courses or events organized by the  incubator. Lastly, there are the contacts that entrepreneurs  meet at events held outside the university, which they at - tend with the incubator´s help (for example, attendance at  trade shows where entrepreneurs have a chance to meet  potential clients). Support people who act as middlemen between en - trepreneurs and other contacts The second contribution of preparation to social capital  is derived from the liaison role played by support staff be - tween entrepreneurs and other contacts. Depending on the entrepreneurs´ needs, the incubator em - ployees try to find people and organizations able to respond  adequately to those needs. They identify contacts and pave  the entrepreneur´s access to them.  Both the incubator and  the university introduce entrepreneurs to investors or cli - ents who come to the university looking for service or in - vestment opportunities. The role of middlemen between entrepreneurs and other  contacts is mainly played by the people closest to the en - trepreneurs, usually the incubator’s director, but possibly  other incubator staff, consultants and, to a lesser degree,  mentors and tutors. These people usually have contacts that  will be useful to entrepreneurs and they use their credibility  to pave the way for the entrepreneurs.  Figure 2 illustrates  Table 7. Summary of preparation mechanism.Nature of preparationContribution of preparation to the formation of  entrepreneurs´ social capital    University and incubator
of preparation to the formation of  entrepreneurs´ social capital    University and incubator follow-up and  support given to the entrepreneur   Occurs during entrepreneurship courses,  consulting sessions and other support and  validation activities for entrepreneurship.    The entrepreneur´s preparation may  begin even before admission to incubation, but  happens mostly during the incubation.  Offers meeting opportunities for entrepreneurs.    Support staff act as middlemen between entrepreneurs  and other contacts.    Preparation helps entrepreneurs to develop social and  business skills.   Preparation helps entrepreneurs to develop their support  and financial networks. To a lesser degree, it also helps them to  develop their business networks.
31ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 that the college environment in which the entrepreneurs  are immersed is constituted primarily of technological con - tacts, with very few business contacts. As a result, in their  daily activities at the university, entrepreneurs hardly ever  meet business contacts. The possibility of obtaining this type  of contact in the college environment, of being close to it  and of interacting with it, is a key factor in establishing rela - tionships and using them for the benefit of the new venture  (Johannisson, 1998; T orres, 1998).   The second factor is that most incubator directors and  staff members have few, if any, contacts in the business sec - tor. Given that most of them come from academic circles,  their networks are composed mainly of technological, sup - port and funding contacts. A similar situation was observed  by T otterman and Sten (2005) and Chabaud, Ehlinger and  Perret (2003). These authors studied incubators in Finland  and France respectively. Incubator directors and other staff  members are essential to the development of entrepre - neurs´ networks. They are important middlemen between  the entrepreneurs and other networks. T o increase the  chances of entrepreneurs developing a business network,  universities should hire support staff with better connec - tions in the business sector. The third factor that hinders the contribution of the spin-off  process to the creation of networks is that there are very  few activities focusing specifically on the development of so - cial capital (e.g. training sessions on social skills and network - ing). A study of 169 incubators carried out by Hansen et al.  (2000) found that only 26% of the sample actually offered  services focused specifically on network development. This  impoverished supply of social
offered  services focused specifically on network development. This  impoverished supply of social capital development activities  is contrary to the recommendations of many authors, who  have emphasized that spin-off support services, including in - cubation, should give priority to the creation of networks  (Carayannis and von Zedtwitz, 2005; Hansen et al., 2000;  Hughes, Ireland, and Morgan, 2007; Hussler and Ronde, 2009;  T otterman and Sten, 2005; Walter, Auer and Ritter, 2006). In short, if universities wish to improve the contribution of  the spin-off process to the development of academic entre - preneur’s social capital, they should increase the number of  business contacts in their environments, hire people with  connections in the business sector to support nascent en - trepreneurs, and provide entrepreneurs with more struc - tured services aiming at developing their social capital.The development of this cognitive proximity with the busi - ness world is significant because one of the factors that fa - vours the mobilization of social capital is cognitive proximity  to the contacts one wishes to use (T orres, 1998, 2007). Table  7 summarizes the preparation mechanism and its contribu - tions to social capital. Discussion and conclusion T o look at how the spin-off process contributes to the de - velopment of academic entrepreneur’s social capital, we car - ried out an inductive, exploratory and qualitative multi-case  study (Yin, 2003) in which we analyzed eight Brazilian aca - demic spin-off cases. We proposed three mechanisms to explain the contribu - tion of the spin-off process to the development of academic  entrepreneurs´ social capital, namely (i) affiliation, (ii) immer - sion and (iii) preparation – in other words, the entrepre - neurs´ affiliation with a university, their immersion in the  university´s network of relationships and the venture crea - tion preparation offered to entrepreneurs by the university. Through these mechanisms, the
32ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 CARAYANNIS, E. G.,  von Zedtwitz, M. (2005). Architect - ing gloCal (global-local), real-virtual incubator networks (G- RVINs) as catalysts and accelerators of entrepreneurship in  transitioning and developing economies: lessons learned and  best practices from current development and business incu - bation practices. T echnovation, 25(2), 95-110.  CHABAUD, D., Ehlinger, S., Perret, V. (2003). Les incubateurs  d’entreprises innovantes: un réseau entrepreneurial re - configuré? Paper presented at the XIIème Conférence de  l’Association International de Management Stratégique, Les  côtes de Carthage.  CHANDRA, A., Silva, M. (2012). Business Incubation in Chile:  Development, Financing and Financial Services. Journal of  T echnology Management & Innovation, 7(2), 1-13. CLARYSSE, B., Wright, M., de Velde, E. (2011). Entrepreneurial  Origin, T echnological Knowledge, and the Growth of Spin- Off Companies. Journal of Management Studies, 48(6), 1420- 1442. COOPER, A. C., Dailly, C. M. (1997). Entrepreneurial T eams.  In: Sexton, D., Smilor, R. W. (Eds.), Entrepreneurship 2000.  Upstart, Chicago. pp. 167-188 DAVIDSSON, P ., Honig, B. (2003). The role of social and hu - man capital among nascent entrepreneurs. Journal of Busi - ness Venturing, 18(3), 301-331.  DELMAR, F . Shane, S. (2003). Does business planning facili - tate the development of new ventures? Strategic Manage - ment Journal, 24(12), 1165-1185. DUBINI, P ., Aldrich, H. (1991). Personal and extended net - works are central to the entrepreneurial process. Journal of  Business Venturing, 6(5), 305-313.  EISENHARDT, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case  study research. Academy of Management Review,  14(4),  532-550. FERRARO, F . (2003). Raising capital: Relational practices and  social capital in Silicon
532-550. FERRARO, F . (2003). Raising capital: Relational practices and  social capital in Silicon Valley entrepreneurship. Unpublished  Ph.D. Thesis, Stanford University, United States -- California.  FILION, L. J., Luc, D., Fortin, P .A. (2003). L’essaimage  d’entreprises - Vers de nouvelles pratiques entrepreneuri - ales. Les Éditions Transcontinental, Montreal.  FRANKLIN, S., Wright, M. (2000). University spin-out com - panies: academic and surrogate entrepreneurs. In: During, W.,  Oakey, R. P ., Kipling, M. (Eds.), New T echnology-Based Firms  at the T urn of the Century. Pergamon, Amsterdam. pp. 35-49.References ADLER, P . S., Kwon, S. W. (2002). Social capital: prospects for  a new concept. Academy of Management Review, 27(1), 17- 40.  ALBORNOZ, C. (2008). T oward a Set of Trainable Content  on Entrepreneurship Education: A Review of Entrepreneur - ship Research from an Educational Perspective. Journal of  T echnology Management & Innovation, 3(2), 86-98. ALDRICH, H., Carter, N. M. (2004). Social networks. In:  Gartner, W. B., Shaver, K. G., Carter, N. M., Reynolds, P . D.  (Eds.), Handbook of entrepreneurial dynamics: the process  of business creation. Sage, Thousand Oaks. pp. 324-335. ALDRICH, H., Rosen, B., Woodward, W. (1987). The impact  of social networks on business foundings and profit: a longi - tudinal study. In: Churchill, N. C., Hornaday, J. A., Kirchhoff, B.,  A., Krasner, J., Vesper, K. H. (Eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneur - ship Research 1987. Babson College, Wellesley. pp. 154-168. ALDRICH, H., Zimmer, C. (1986). Entrepreneurship through  social networks. In: Sexton, D. L., Smilor, R. W. (Eds.), The Art  and science of entrepreneurship. Ballinger, Cambridge. pp.  3-23. ANDERSON, A.; Park, J.; Jack, S. (2007) Entrepreneurial So - cial Capital: Conceptualizing Social Capital in New High-tech  Firms. International Small Business Journal, 25(3), 245-269.  AUDRETSCH D., Aldridge T., Sanders M. (2011), Social Capi - tal Building and New Business --- 245-269.  AUDRETSCH D., Aldridge T., Sanders M. (2011), Social Capi - tal Building and New Business Formation: A Case Study in  Silicon Valley, International Small Business Journal, 29(2) 152- 169. BARON, R. A. (2004). Social skills. In: Gartner, W. B., Shaver, K.  G., Carter, N. M., Reynolds, P . D. (Eds.), Handbook of entre - preneurial dynamics: the process of business creation. Sage,  Thousand Oaks. pp. 220-233. BARON, R. A.,  Markman, G. D. (2003). Beyond social capital:  the role of entrepreneurs’ social competence in their finan - cial success. Journal of Business Venturing, 18(1), 41-60.  BIRLEY, S. (1985). The role of networks in the entrepreneuri - al process. Journal of Business Venturing, 1(1), 107-117.  BOURDIEU, P . (1986). The forms of capital. In: Richardson, J.  G. (Ed.), Handbook of theory and research for the sociology  of education. Greenwood Press, Westport. pp. 241-258.
33ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 JOHANNISSON, B., Ramirez-Pasillas, M.,  Karlsson, G.  (2002). The institutional embeddedness of local inter-firm  networks: A leverage for business creation. Entrepreneur - ship and Regional Development, 14(4), 297-315.  JULIEN, P .A. (2000). L’entrepreneuriat au Québec - Pour une  révolution tranquille entrepreneurial 1980-2005. Les Édi - tions Transcontinental, Montreal.  KARIM, M.,  Sammut, S. (2007). Processus entrepreneurial et  pépinières d’entreprises: quand l’accompagnement conduit  à l’isolement. Paper presented at the XVIème Conférence  de l’Association Internationale de Management Stratégique,  Montréal.  KIM, P . H.,  Aldrich, H. E. (2005). Social capital and entrepre - neurship. Now, Boston.  LECHNER, C., Dowling, M. (2003). Firm networks: external  relationships as sources for the growth and competitiveness  of entrepreneurial firms. Entrepreneurship and Regional De - velopment, 15(1), 1-26.  LEMIEUX, V.,  Ouimet, M. (2004). L’analyse structurale des  réseaux sociaux. Presses de l’Université Laval, Québec.  LIAO, J.,  Welsch, H. (2002). The temporal patterns of ven - ture creation process: an exploratory study In: Bygrave, W.  D., Brush, C. G., Davidsson, P ., Fiet, J., Greene, P . G., Harrison,  R. T., Lerner, M., Meyer, G. D., Sohl, J., Zacharakis, A. (Eds.),  Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 2002. Babson Col - lege, Wellesley.  MEYER, M. (2003). Academic entrepreneurs or entrepre - neurial academics?  Research-based ventures and public sup - port mechanisms. R&D Management, 33(2), 107-115.  MIAN, S. A. (1996). Assessing value-added contributions of  university technology business incubators to tenant firms.  Research Policy, 25(3), 325-335.  MILES, M. B., Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analy - sis: an expanded sourcebook (2nd ed.).
M. B., Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analy - sis: an expanded sourcebook (2nd ed.). Sage, Thousand Oaks.  MURRAY, F . (2004). The role of academic inventors in entre - preneurial firms: sharing the laboratory life. Research Policy,  33(4), 643-659.  NEERGAARD, H. (2005). Networking activities in technolo - gy-based entrepreneurial teams. International Small Business  Journal, 23(3), 257-278.  NEERGAARD, H., Madsen, H. (2004). Knowledge intensive  entrepreneurship in a social capital perspective. Journal of  Enterprising Culture, 12(2), 105-125. FREITAS, J., Gonçalves, C., Cheng, L., Muniz, R. (2011). Par - simonious Determinants of Pre-Incubated Academic Spin- Offs Initial Performance: a Configurational Perspective. Jour - nal of T echnology Management & Innovation, 6(2), 50-65. GRANDI, A., Grimaldi, R. (2003). Exploring the networking  characteristics of new venture founding teams. Small Busi - ness Economics, 21(4), 329-341.  GRIMALDI, R., Grandi, A. (2005). Business incubators and  new venture creation: an assessment of incubating models.  T echnovation, 25(2), 111-121.  HANSEN, E. L. (2000). Resource acquisition as a startup pro - cess: initial stocks of social capital and organizational found - ings. In: Reynolds, P . D., Autio, E., Brush, C. G., Bygrave, W. D.,  Manigart, S., Sapienza, H. J., Shaver, K. G. (Eds.), Frontiers of  Entrepreneurship Research 2000. Babson College, Wellesley.  HANSEN, M. T., Chesbrough, H. W., Nohria, N.,  Sull, D. N.  (2000). Networked incubators: Hothouses of the new econ - omy. Harvard Business Review, 78(5), 74-84.  HILL, J., McGowan, P ., Drummond, P . (1999). The develop - ment and application of a qualitative approach to research - ing the marketing networks of small firm entrepreneurs.  Qualitative Market Research, 2(2), 71-81.  HITE, J. M. (2003). Patterns of multidimensionality among  embedded network ties: a typology of relational embedded - ness in emerging entrepreneurial firms. Strategic Organiza - tion, --- of relational embedded - ness in emerging entrepreneurial firms. Strategic Organiza - tion, 1(1), 9-49.  HUGHES, M., Ireland, R. D., Morgan, R. E. (2007). Stimulating  Dynamic Value: Social Capital and Business Incubation as a  Pathway to Competitive Success. Long Range Planning, 40(2),  154-177.  HUSSLER, C., Ronde, P . (2009). Investing in Networking  Competences or Establishing in Hot Spots?. The Innovation  Dilemna. Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation,  4(4), 1-13. JOHANNISSON, B. (1996). The dynamics of entrepreneurial  networks. In: Reynolds, P . D., Birley, S. J., Butler, E., Bygrave, W.  D., Davidsson, P ., Gartner, W. B., McDougall, P . P . (Eds.), Fron - tiers of Entrepreneurship Research 1996. Babson College,  Wellesley. pp. 253-267. JOHANNISSON, B. (1998). Personal networks in emerging  knowledge-based firms: Spatial and functional patterns. En - trepreneurship & Regional Development, 10(4), 297-312.
34ISSN: 0718-2724. (http://www.jotmi.org)  Journal of T echnology Management & Innovation © Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Facultad de Economía y Negocios.J. T echnol. Manag. Innov. 2013,  Volume 8, Issue 1 UZZI, B. (1996). The sources and consequences of embed - dedness for the economic performance of organizations:  the network effect. American Sociological Review, 61(4),  674-698.  UZUNCA, B. (2011). Comparative Advantages of Spinoff  Firms: An Evolutionary Perspective. Journal of T echnology  Management & Innovation, 6(4), 80-92. VERSIANI, A., Guimaraes, L. (2006). Creation of technologi - cally-based firms in Brazil: the influence of incubators on the  set-up of new business. Revista Eletrônica de Administração,  12(3), 1-23.  WALTER, A., Auer, M., Ritter, T. (2006). The impact of net - work capabilities and entrepreneurial orientation on uni - versity spin-off performance. Journal of Business Venturing,  21(4), 541-567.  WOLFFENBÜTTEL, A., Fracasso, E., Bignetti, L. (2004). The  university-firms interaction process in a university incuba - tor: the case of the Vale do Rio dos Sinos University’s incu - bator Revista Eletrônica de Administração, 10(1), 1-19.  YIN, R. K. (2003). Case study research: design and methods  (3rd ed.). Sage, Thousand Oaks. NICOLAOU, N., Birley, S. (2003). Academic networks in a  trichotomous categorisation of university spinouts. Journal  of Business Venturing, 18(3), 333-359.  ORGANISATION de coopération et de développement  économiques - OCDE. (2001). Special issue on fostering  high-tech spin-offs: a public strategy for Innovation. Organi - sation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris.  PATTON, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation  methods (3rd ed.). Sage, Thousand Oaks.  PEREZ, M. P ., & Sanchez, A. M. (2003). The development of  university spin-offs: early dynamics of technology transfer  and networking. T echnovation, 23(10), 823-831.  PIRNAY, F . (2001). La valorisation économique des résultats  de
El artículo titulado "Spin-off Process and the Development of Academic Entrepreneur’s Social Capital", publicado en el Journal of Technology Management & Innovation, se centra en la limitada investigación sobre cómo el proceso de spin-off contribuye al desarrollo del capital social de los emprendedores académicos. Este estudio, de carácter inductivo, exploratorio y cualitativo, se basa en ocho estudios de caso de emprendimiento académico realizados por los autores Cândido Borges y Louis Jacques Filion.

### Mecanismos Clave Identificados
Los autores identifican tres mecanismos fundamentales que explican cómo el proceso de spin-off influye en el capital social de los emprendedores académicos:

1. **Afiliación con la universidad**: La conexión formal e informal que los emprendedores mantienen con la institución académica les otorga acceso a recursos, conocimientos y credibilidad, elementos esenciales para su desarrollo profesional y empresarial.

2. **Inmersión en la red de relaciones de la universidad**: Los emprendedores se benefician de las redes de contactos que la universidad proporciona, lo que les permite establecer relaciones con otros académicos, empresarios y potenciales inversores, ampliando así su capital social.

3. **Preparación para la creación de nuevas empresas**: La universidad desempeña un papel activo en la formación y preparación de los emprendedores, brindándoles las herramientas y conocimientos necesarios para lanzar y gestionar sus nuevas empresas.

### Conclusiones del Estudio
El estudio concluye que el proceso de spin-off no solo facilita la creación de nuevas empresas, sino que también es un factor crucial en el desarrollo del capital social de los emprendedores académicos, lo que puede influir en el éxito de sus iniciativas empresariales. El artículo se enmarca en temas como el emprendimiento académico, las incubadoras, las redes sociales y el emprendimiento tecnológico, subrayando la importancia de las universidades en la promoción del emprendimiento y la innovación.

### Estructura del Artículo
El artículo se organiza en cinco secciones:

1. **Introducción**: Presenta el contexto y la relevancia del estudio.
2. **Metodología**: Describe los métodos utilizados para llevar a cabo la investigación.
3. **Resultados**: Presenta y examina los hallazgos obtenidos.
4. **Discusión**: Resume y discute los aspectos más importantes de la investigación.

### Conceptos Clave
El estudio se fundamenta en dos conceptos clave:

1. **Spin-offs Académicos**: Se define como el proceso y resultado de la creación de una nueva empresa a partir de conocimientos tecnológicos desarrollados en el contexto universitario, a menudo con el apoyo de incubadoras de negocios universitarias.

2. **Capital Social de los Emprendedores Académicos**: Se refiere a las redes de relaciones y conexiones que los emprendedores pueden utilizar para obtener recursos, apoyo y oportunidades en el desarrollo de sus spin-offs.

### Contexto de los Spin-offs Académicos
Los spin-offs académicos son una forma de transferencia de tecnología donde las universidades actúan como generadores de nuevas empresas, contribuyendo al desarrollo económico y a la valorización de los resultados de la investigación académica.

### Referencias y Estudios Previos
El artículo cita diversas fuentes y estudios previos que han abordado el tema de los spin-offs académicos y el emprendimiento en el contexto universitario, mencionando autores como Filion, Meyer, Pirnay y Shane.

### Conclusión
El artículo enfatiza la necesidad de comprender cómo el proceso de spin-off contribuye al desarrollo del capital social de los emprendedores académicos, destacando la importancia del apoyo institucional en este contexto. Se concluye que tanto el emprendedor como la tecnología que fundamenta la nueva empresa provienen de una organización madre, generalmente una universidad, donde el emprendedor trabaja o estudia. Las universidades no solo proporcionan talento humano y tecnología, sino también acceso a laboratorios, oficinas de transferencia de tecnología, promoción de una cultura emprendedora, ayuda financiera, consultoría y espacio de oficina, todos elementos que son cruciales para el éxito de los spin-offs.

### Actividades de Apoyo
El texto menciona que las universidades ofrecen diversas actividades de apoyo, incluyendo:

- Acceso a laboratorios de investigación.
- Oficinas de transferencia de tecnología.
- Promoción de una cultura emprendedora.
- Ayuda financiera.
- Sesiones de consultoría y cursos.
- Espacio de oficina.
- Acceso a redes de relaciones.

### Importancia del Capital Social
El capital social se presenta como un factor que contribuye al éxito de una nueva empresa, y se ha demostrado que tanto el capital social inicial de los emprendedores como sus habilidades sociales y esfuerzos de networking son cruciales para el éxito de sus iniciativas empresariales.

### Metodología del Estudio
El estudio es inductivo, exploratorio y cualitativo, basado en ocho casos de estudio seleccionados bajo criterios de máxima variación. Se realizaron entrevistas semiestructuradas y se utilizó el software NVivo 2.0 para el análisis de datos.

### Resumen Final
El texto destaca la interconexión entre universidades, emprendedores y capital social, subrayando cómo estos elementos se combinan para facilitar la creación y el éxito de nuevas empresas. Se establece que el proceso de creación de spin-offs académicos está intrínsecamente relacionado con el desarrollo del capital social de los emprendedores, y se enfatiza la necesidad de más investigación en este ámbito para fomentar un ecosistema que apoye la innovación y la creación de empresas basadas en tecnología desarrollada en entornos académicos.
